[Amit Varma]: This episode releases on August 15, 2022. It's been 75 years and thinking about the
[Amit Varma]: journey we've made as a country makes me both sentimental and sad. It makes me sentimental
[Amit Varma]: because I love India. I'm so happy that we survived as a nation and that we are still
[Amit Varma]: fingers crossed. This delightful kichri of people and languages and foods and cultural
[Amit Varma]: practices. This is a unique land to grow up in. It contains multitudes. At the same time,
[Amit Varma]: I'm sad because so much of our potential has not been realized. And in many ways, we are
[Amit Varma]: still backward, we are still the worst version of ourselves. If you're a regular listener
[Amit Varma]: of this podcast, you would have heard me speaking about three problems that we have today. The
[Amit Varma]: first is approximate problem, the party in power today. And you can disagree with me
[Amit Varma]: on that. That's cool. But the other two problems are deeper problems that are older than our
[Amit Varma]: republic. One is the fault lines within our society, which leads to so much hatred, bigotry,
[Amit Varma]: intolerance, and is threatening to tear our country apart today. And the other is the
[Amit Varma]: subject of this episode, the dysfunctional state. We borrowed the state from our colonial
[Amit Varma]: masters, and it was designed to rule us not to serve us. And much that is wrong with our
[Amit Varma]: country today has to do with the design of the state, top down, oppressive, not doing
[Amit Varma]: the things that are supposed to do and doing a lot that it should not. Are we stuck in
[Amit Varma]: a bad equilibrium with no way out? My guest today argues that we can solve this problem.
[Amit Varma]: First, we have to understand exactly what's wrong with the Indian state. And then we have
[Amit Varma]: to figure out what we need to do. Karthik Muralidharan is the best kind of problem solver.
[Unknown]: He asks the right questions, and then he finds the answers. Welcome to the scene and the
[Amit Varma]: unseen. My guest today is Karthik Muralidharan, the superstar economist whose two episodes
[Amit Varma]: with me on education and healthcare are masterclasses on the subject. In fact, he has become a bit
[Amit Varma]: of a cult figure among regular listeners. I'll link those two episodes in the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: When Karthik and I last recorded, we promised to follow up with an episode on federalism.
[Amit Varma]: Well, he's finally done with a draft of a magisterial book on India's state capacity,
[Amit Varma]: which has chapters on education and healthcare, which we've already discussed, and on federalism,
[Amit Varma]: which we decided to discuss in this episode. But his book's introductory essay itself has
[Amit Varma]: some amazing gyan about the nature of the state and about state capacity. And we spent
[Amit Varma]: much of the time discussing that before zooming into federalism. Still, it's a long and meaty
[Amit Varma]: episode and we cover a lot. Karthik is that rare thinker who both grapples with big ideas
[Amit Varma]: and engages with the real world on the ground. For that reason, his insights are deep and
[Amit Varma]: his solutions are practical. This was one hell of a conversation. But before we get
[Amit Varma]: to it, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Karthik, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Guest]: It's a pleasure to be back, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I've got to tell my listeners that unfortunately, I have to break an older promise in the sense
[Amit Varma]: that I think when we ended our last episode, I promised I'd start this one with Antakshari,
[Amit Varma]: because your mellifluous singing voice has been a huge hit across this country. However,
[Amit Varma]: you're just kind of recovering from COVID. You are COVID negative now, but throat problems
[Amit Varma]: are lingering on and all of that. So I hope listeners will sort of understand and forgive
[Amit Varma]: you for that. And one hopes that the insights that you come up with, therefore, are enough
[Amit Varma]: on their own.
[Guest]: Yeah, I didn't think the music was a particular highlight, but I enjoyed it. So hopefully
[Guest]: we'll do that some other time.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, we'll get you to sing some other time. What I'm really excited about now is of course,
[Amit Varma]: we are talking about federalism today, as we promised in our last episode. So people
[Amit Varma]: are just tuning in, we've kind of done two episodes in the past on education and healthcare.
[Amit Varma]: Both of them have been super hits. In fact, education was for a while, it overtook Srinath
[Amit Varma]: Raghavan's episodes on Kashmir and CAA to be number one downloaded episode on the show.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, the Shah Rukh Khan of economists was overtaken by the actual Shah Rukh Khan.
[Amit Varma]: My episode with Shreyana Bhattacharya on the loneliness of the Indian woman is now number
[Amit Varma]: one. And maybe you can sometimes someday, you know, talk about the loneliness of an
[Amit Varma]: Indian economist. But leaving that aside, you know, I don't just want to talk about
[Amit Varma]: federalism. I also sort of you very kindly send me the introductory chapter to your book
[Amit Varma]: with a tantalizing table of contents, and also the chapter on federalism. And I have
[Amit Varma]: to say, I don't want to flatter you, but I can't wait for this book to come out number
[Amit Varma]: one. Two, one of the things that I felt a paucity of in recent years, is books that
[Amit Varma]: explain fundamental aspects about India to those who want to know like so many people
[Amit Varma]: do, you know, in my view, Vijay Kelkar and Ajay Shah's In Service of the Republic is
[Amit Varma]: one such book, where it lays out this beautiful, clear, lucid way of thinking about public
[Amit Varma]: policy. And your book is a remarkable book, you know, just by looking at the contents
[Amit Varma]: and you know, we've effectively done episodes in two of the chapters and the introduction
[Amit Varma]: is magisterial. And, you know, just in terms of understanding the relationship between
[Amit Varma]: state and society and all the ways in which we are bedevilled, it is so clear sighted.
[Amit Varma]: So I just want to get that out of the way and say that I cannot wait for this book to
[Amit Varma]: come out. I think this will be one of the essential books for anyone interested in understanding
[Amit Varma]: India. And on that note, I think I've embarrassed you enough. So tell me about, you know, how
[Amit Varma]: was the experience of sort of writing the book? Is all of it complete? How was this
[Amit Varma]: experience like for you? What have the COVID months been like? And what was getting COVID
[Amit Varma]: like?
[Guest]: Yeah, no, I think, you know, so thank you. Thank you so much. I think this feels like
[Guest]: one of those, one of those things that, you know, I've been working on, I come on the
[Guest]: episode, I come on the show about once a year to give a progress update. The good news is
[Guest]: this is almost done. I think when I first, when I first mentioned the book, I had just
[Guest]: about started it. So I think, you know, the, it's been a lot of fun. I mean, of course,
[Guest]: it's work in the process of putting together stuff like this is never easy. I think the
[Guest]: challenge in writing the book, and I think Pramit mentioned this nicely in his episode
[Guest]: with you in terms of, you know, what he aims for in a mint column, right, which is that
[Guest]: it should be accessible to somebody with a 10th grade education, but the deepest expert
[Guest]: in the subject should not find anything wrong in it, right? I mean, so hitting, so kind
[Guest]: of combining that balance whereby everything I say is kind of based to the extent possible
[Guest]: in deep research, but at the same time, accessible to a non-technical audience, right, is I think
[Guest]: the hardest part of putting together something like this. But, but it's been a lot of fun.
[Guest]: It's been a lot of fun, because, you know, the truth is that the core job of an academic
[Guest]: economist, the way the profession runs these days is not to write books, it is to write
[Guest]: individual research papers, and these papers take years of work and depth, and we'll talk
[Guest]: if we have time about a couple of those papers today. But I think, you know, we don't typically
[Guest]: write books, right? I'm just an economic historian. And so the reason the book has been fun is
[Guest]: that there is so much lost, I mean, so much in the, that we learn in the fieldwork, in
[Guest]: the process of engaging with these subjects, that doesn't get captured in the individual
[Guest]: papers, and the books have, and the book has been a chance to kind of connect the dots,
[Guest]: right, across everything that I've done over the years. And so, you know, people, when
[Guest]: you look at the stock of my work, will think of me first and foremost as an education economist.
[Guest]: And then the last episode, we're like, wait, you know, like, how come you're also talking
[Guest]: and writing about health? And then when you get to federalism and political economy, as
[Guest]: we'll talk about today, it seems even more distant from my core work. But I think it's
[Guest]: a good example of how, in working on education, right, it's become so obvious that the fundamental
[Guest]: problems in India really have to do with state capacity and governance, and that these transcend
[Guest]: all sectors, right? So whether it's education, whether it's health, whether it's police,
[Guest]: whether it's courts, and so, so the case for writing this book was really kind of, you
[Guest]: know, to take both a 10,000 foot bird's eye view to kind of explain the Indian state and
[Guest]: why we are the way we are, but also take a bit of a worm's eye view that reflects kind
[Guest]: of a tangible agenda of implementable ideas, that reflects kind of both the time on the
[Guest]: ground and the time engaging with the policymakers, with the people trying to do things. So I
[Guest]: think the, so it's been a lot of fun, but of course, you know, it's, I mean, what's
[Guest]: frustrating about it is I think the ideas have been in my head for about two to three
[Guest]: years, and obviously, they get refined as you write them, but converting all of that
[Guest]: into the written word that is linear, and I think we talked about this last time as
[Guest]: well, that everything is connected, right? So, and that's, I think, the hardest part,
[Guest]: which is how to hold the reader with me, saying that I know you're thinking about these three
[Guest]: things right now, but they're going to show up 100 pages later. So I think my early drafts
[Guest]: had too many cross-references, right? Look at this, look at this, look at this, but then
[Guest]: that breaks the flow when you're reading. So it's those kind of mechanics of how do
[Guest]: you take a complex set of, I mean, it's really, I think, part of what I'm trying to do in
[Guest]: the book is present systems-level thinking of understanding the Indian state. And yeah,
[Guest]: so I think, you know, again, I want to thank you and, you know, and the platform for a
[Guest]: very, very important piece of positive feedback, right? Because my biggest fear in writing
[Guest]: this is that is it just too complex and too kind of, you know, just too dense with ideas,
[Guest]: right? I mean, for people to kind of be able to, able to take in, particularly if you're
[Guest]: not an academic, and I think your journey with the podcast of kind of going with the
[Guest]: same initial view that people may not have the attention span to listen more than half
[Guest]: an hour and finding that, you know, now three, four hours are pretty routine. And the fact
[Guest]: that the education and health podcasts have done well, and people have been asking for
[Guest]: transcripts kind of has helped to give me the confidence that there is, in fact, a market
[Guest]: for this kind of, you know, deep, but accessible writing, which is which is what I'm hoping,
[Amit Varma]: hoping the book will do.
[Amit Varma]: You use, you know, at one level, you mentioned those dual aspects of a bird's eye view and
[Amit Varma]: a worm's eye view. And I want to ask you about another sort of related sort of duality, which
[Amit Varma]: is the duality between being one, a sort of a researcher, who's constantly bringing out
[Amit Varma]: new papers and bringing out new ideas into the world, and to being a public intellectual,
[Amit Varma]: you know, who is broadcasting those ideas to the world and enhancing understanding and
[Amit Varma]: in a sense, that is a public service. And I want to ask you about the tension between
[Amit Varma]: these two, because on the one hand, as you just told me before we just started the recording,
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, as an academic, there is pressure to have new things in every paper. But as
[Amit Varma]: a public intellectual, you want to repeat the basics again and again and again, till
[Amit Varma]: people till it becomes part of the air. And obviously, you're one can have possibly a
[Amit Varma]: much greater impact as a public intellectual. But the danger there is that, you know, your
[Amit Varma]: ideas become like air, like no one can, you know, they just become common knowledge. And
[Amit Varma]: it doesn't seem remarkable in hindsight, but you move the needle a lot. But at the same
[Amit Varma]: time, by joining by being part of that process of incremental progress within academia, that
[Amit Varma]: also, you know, makes an enormous difference in, you know, enhancing the progress of ideas
[Amit Varma]: and just going forward all the time, step by step by step being an example for other
[Amit Varma]: academics who then sort of continue that journey. So how do you think about this? Like, my bias
[Amit Varma]: is obviously, you know, towards the public intellectual side of it that, you know, people
[Amit Varma]: have, like you said, this hunger for knowledge, this hunger for understanding, and feeding
[Amit Varma]: that is incredibly important. And you never know where it's going to, you know, move the
[Amit Varma]: needle somewhere. And like you pointed out in our earlier episodes, you know, what drew
[Amit Varma]: you towards working with policies was a tiny change, a 0.1% progress can impact millions
[Amit Varma]: of people in a massive way, right? That is the joy of engaging with this, because the
[Amit Varma]: scale is enormous. So how do you deal with this conflict between new academic work and
[Amit Varma]: the public intellectuals work of simplifying these ideas without dumping them down?
[Guest]: I think the truth is that it really isn't a conflict, right? I think the only conflict,
[Guest]: frankly, is in the amount of time you have, okay? So I think, but substantively, there
[Guest]: is no conflict in doing these two things, right? I mean, which is, you know, even as
[Guest]: an academic, right, the way you teach a PhD student is very different from the way you
[Guest]: teach a master's student is different from the way you teach an undergrad, right? I mean,
[Guest]: so in that sense, I see kind of, and frankly, I, you know, it feels presumptuous to think
[Guest]: of myself as a public intellectual, maybe the closest I've gotten there is coming on
[Guest]: your shows. But other than that, like, you know, for the most part, I've been living
[Guest]: in the world of academia. But I don't think there is a fundamental tension there at all,
[Guest]: right? I think as professors, we are, in fact, you know, there's something I like to tell
[Guest]: students sometimes is that going through going through the academic journey is a little bit
[Guest]: like going through an hourglass, okay, which is, you start out as an undergrad, as an eager
[Guest]: beaver undergrad at the top of the hourglass, or maybe even a high school student these
[Guest]: days, right? I mean, who's exposed to many, many, many, many things, and then you get
[Guest]: excited, then you figure out things you want to do more deeply. And then you kind of start
[Guest]: going into the narrow parts of the hourglass. Life as a PhD student is when you're in that
[Guest]: neck of the hourglass, when you're doing just one thing, but doing it kind of, you know,
[Guest]: in great depth. But then as you come out of the funnel of the PhD student and become an
[Guest]: assistant professor, you know, associate professor, full professor, chaired professor, then you're
[Guest]: back at kind of the wide side of the hourglass, right? I mean, where you're kind of then connecting
[Guest]: the small dots back to the big picture, like, I mean, I'm making those connections available.
[Guest]: So I don't think there's a conflict there at all. I think the main conflict is one of
[Guest]: time and temperament, right? I mean, and I think the, so time, yes, there's no question
[Guest]: that it takes time to do the additional work I do, whether it's engaging with policymakers,
[Guest]: whether it's, you know, writing policy review papers and doing that kind of stuff. And,
[Guest]: you know, you could be writing two more new papers in that time. But I think, you know,
[Guest]: we all have a pretty good sense of, intuitive sense of where is the highest marginal return
[Guest]: on time invested, right? So that also has to map into your own kind of intrinsic utility.
[Guest]: Sorry, to sound so much like an economist, what do you enjoy doing, but also kind of
[Guest]: sharpening the saw, right? The problem about kind of just becoming a public intellectual
[Guest]: who's not doing fundamental research is you very quickly lose touch with where the cutting
[Guest]: edge of the discipline is in terms of, you know, methods and just the conversations that
[Guest]: are happening. But at the same time, if you're just kind of playing in that very, very narrow
[Guest]: sphere, then, I mean, in some ways, it's a real shame. In fact, there's a nice, you know,
[Guest]: given our history of backstories. So I have, in fact, while I do have a Twitter account,
[Guest]: I've become much, you know, I've really become much more silent these days because, you know,
[Guest]: I just don't find it that productive. In fact, for the longest time I wasn't on Twitter.
[Guest]: And because it almost felt like an academic, you were kind of, you know, defiling the ivory
[Guest]: tower, so to speak, right? Like, you know, by being out in that space. But I remember,
[Guest]: I think it was 2013, I was giving a workshop on education to, at that time, the Cabinet
[Guest]: Minister and Minister of State, Shashi Tharoor, who has also been on your show. And I think
[Guest]: he was tweeting a couple of things during the show. And his followers, even in that
[Guest]: time, over a million, were asking for references, asking for things, right? You know, where
[Guest]: is this coming from? And he told me, are you on Twitter? I said, no, I'm an academic. I
[Guest]: write papers. I'm not on Twitter. And then he said something interesting. He said, listen,
[Guest]: you know, you are all of your work is directly or indirectly funded by the taxpayer, right?
[Guest]: I mean, either through grants or through tax exemptions for research grants. So you at
[Guest]: least owe it to the public, you know, to put it out in the public domain, right? I mean,
[Guest]: in a more accessible way. And that's something before that, you know, I mean, that's partly
[Guest]: what Montague, who also you've had on your show, and they've all, you know, been mentors
[Guest]: at various stages, like, you know, but his invitation to come and spend time writing
[Guest]: parts of the background paper to the 12th Five-Year Plan was exactly the same thing,
[Guest]: right? Saying that it's not enough to just do the research, you really owe it to the
[Guest]: broader kind of community to do your best to synthesise these things. So I think, you
[Guest]: know, there is, so I think the only tension is time, there isn't a tension in terms of
[Guest]: the substance. And one way to kind of manage that is even on Twitter, I usually just post
[Guest]: three or four kinds of things, right? I post new papers, I post new op-eds, I post, you
[Guest]: know, any public lectures I'm giving, and I'll typically post some recruitments, post
[Guest]: talks, you know, that kind of stuff. But I will typically almost never get into a discussion
[Guest]: or, you know, be there for the sake of kind of saying, oh, I haven't tweeted in two months,
[Guest]: that's completely fine. If I have no new paper or nothing new to say, then I'm completely
[Amit Varma]: fine with that.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, the constraint of time was a constraint, I mean, because that's what makes
[Amit Varma]: it a trade off and a related, you know, digression on that question on that is that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: I've noticed that, you know, getting into your 40s, especially when you pass your mid
[Amit Varma]: 40s, in my case, it sort of really, in my case, it's focus on mind in the sense that
[Amit Varma]: you realize that, you know, when you're young, you can have all kinds of diffused ambitions,
[Amit Varma]: you think in broad abstract terms, yeh karenge, woh karenge, yeh hoga, woh hoga. But as you
[Amit Varma]: get, you know, you reach a certain point, and you realize that a most of those things
[Amit Varma]: ain't gonna happen. And B, most of those, it doesn't matter, your happiness doesn't
[Amit Varma]: kind of depend on that your intrinsic utility, as you would describe happiness doesn't necessarily
[Amit Varma]: depend on that. So just in terms of your own trajectory, you know, how has that changed
[Amit Varma]: your approach to the work in the sense that, you know, when you were 25? How would you
[Amit Varma]: have kind of what is the kind of work you would have seen yourself doing at 45? And
[Amit Varma]: now that you've actually, you know, you are getting to that stage of life as I am, you
[Amit Varma]: know, how has your thinking changed? Is it more like what is I'm guessing that you're
[Amit Varma]: at that phase where you only do the kind of work which makes you happy, which makes you
[Amit Varma]: satisfied? And, you know, do you do it for just the intrinsic importance of the work
[Amit Varma]: as it were? Or do you also think about think in terms of what can maximize positive outcomes
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth? What's your thinking towards this kind of work? Like, has it become
[Amit Varma]: easier or harder to play the long game? Because some might say the older you get, the harder
[Amit Varma]: it is to play the long game, because there's not so much left. But on the other hand, the
[Amit Varma]: way I see it is that, you know, you can be equanimous about all the immediate gratifications
[Amit Varma]: you're not going to get. And therefore, it's easier to play the long game because you can
[Amit Varma]: just enjoy the process and do the things that you have to do. So do you see your work, A,
[Amit Varma]: in that larger sense of I'm playing the long game, I want to make a difference and it almost
[Amit Varma]: in a sense of it's my dharma to do this. And do you also and you do also do it because
[Guest]: it makes you happy? It puts you in a good place? Yeah, I think and absolutely, I think,
[Guest]: you know, the answer is both. And I said this, I think I said this at the end of the first
[Guest]: episode, right? I think that, you know, about why being a, you know, being a tenured professor
[Guest]: in a top research university truly is one of the best jobs in the world, right? Because
[Guest]: you get to, I think, you know, the most important, I remember asking Abhijit Banerjee a few years
[Guest]: before he won the Nobel Prize, right? I said, Listen, you've done all of this stuff, you
[Guest]: know, what is the objective function at this point, right? And what are you maximizing?
[Guest]: So a variant of the same question you asked me, and he had a simple answer, he said, like,
[Guest]: my goal is not to be bored, okay, which is, I just want to learn new things, right? So
[Guest]: there is something about, you know, and a good academic always has an inherent curiosity,
[Guest]: right? I mean, about learning new things. And you know, that, and that's the joy of
[Guest]: the research, right? Because you will often kind of discover new things in the data, new
[Guest]: patterns in the data that will be, you know, some will validate certain ideas you have,
[Guest]: some will raise new puzzles. And, and again, you know, I'm, I'm fundamentally an empiricist
[Guest]: and not, you know, I'm not a theoretical economist, you know, I'm aware of the theory, read the
[Guest]: theory. But as we'll see, even when we talk about federalism, in almost every aspect of
[Guest]: economics, you can argue things theoretically on both sides. Okay, so, so most things in
[Guest]: the end come down to what does the data say? And the nice thing about being an empiricist
[Guest]: is that, you know, the data always has an ability to surprise you, right? You never,
[Guest]: you never stop learning. Okay, so I think that's the, there is an intrinsic joy and
[Guest]: a part that just keeps you current, keeps you learning, keeps you, you know, just excited
[Guest]: about, about the academic enterprise. But it is true that as you get older, like, you
[Guest]: know, the, the optimal role changes, right? So I feel there's a lot of these arcs of careers
[Guest]: I'm talking about, particularly with academia. And I do think, I think last time, part of
[Guest]: my goal was to excite a bunch of young college goers to become health economists and study
[Guest]: health. This time, I'm hoping I'm going to do that about public science and federalism.
[Guest]: But you know, but there's these side shows about life in academia, right? I mean, and
[Guest]: what this whole enterprise means. So one way to think about the arc of an academic career
[Guest]: is that your 20s are when you're getting trained and learning how to do stuff. Your 30s are
[Guest]: when you're established. Now, this is true of empirical stuff. I think in pure science
[Guest]: or pure physics or math, you know, people do their best work earlier. But, you know,
[Guest]: but your 30s are when you are really establishing yourself. You're typically starting out as
[Guest]: an assistant professor. These days, you know, with PhDs and postdocs, people start out as
[Guest]: assistant professors in their early 30s, late 20s. So the 30s are when you're establishing
[Guest]: yourself, getting tenure, and then hopefully getting promoted to a full professor, say,
[Guest]: by the end of your 30s, early 40s. And your 40s really are your peak, or, you know, maybe
[Guest]: 35 to 55, right? You know, is your peak in the sense that you're established enough to
[Guest]: have access to kind of grants and students and PhD students and postdocs who want to
[Guest]: work with you, but you're young enough to have the energy to kind of really go after
[Guest]: big things, right? I mean, build out major ambitious research programs and stuff like
[Guest]: that. And then, you know, in your 50s, and this period in the 40s includes things like
[Guest]: editing major journals, running major grant programs, because you're also kind of shaping
[Guest]: the field, you know, in that period. And I think in the 50s, a lot of people then do
[Guest]: gravitate towards academic administration, right? I mean, whether you're becoming department
[Guest]: chairs or deans or whatever, because that is, it is painful work, but it is essential
[Guest]: work. And it is important for the person doing that job to be somebody who's actually done,
[Guest]: you know, the process and has lived in the shoes of what younger faculty members are
[Guest]: going through. And then funnily enough, in your 60s and 70s, and this is again, why being
[Guest]: an academic is such a great kind of privilege, because you get to stay relevant and engaged
[Guest]: even up to your 70s. And it's like the best thing, frankly, to do in your 60s and 70s
[Guest]: is to do a lot more undergrad teaching, okay? And that's because you've now come out at
[Guest]: the end of the hourglass on your side, right? And you're also catering to the young folks
[Guest]: at the other side, but also with the width, right? And the breadth. So at that time, the
[Guest]: value of the perspective that you've acquired over the course of your life is kind of, the
[Guest]: value of that when transmitted to young undergrads is just incredible, right? So when I think
[Guest]: about my own time at Harvard as an undergrad, my advisors, or the people that you spend
[Guest]: the most time with, were all in their late 60s and 70s, right? You know, at least they
[Guest]: were the ones who had the most time for me, right? So people like Jeff Williamson, Peter
[Guest]: Timmer, Dwight Perkins, you know, so they used to teach this class on structural transformation.
[Guest]: And the historical perspective, the depth that they had for an undergrad was amazing,
[Guest]: and they also had the time for me. Whereas in my PhD, my advisors were kind of in their
[Guest]: late 30s, early 40s, because that's when you were kind of at the peak of your research
[Guest]: career, and those become, you know, the ideal. So anyway, so to come back and think about
[Guest]: this in the context of my own life, I am in my mid 40s, just turned 46. So in that sense,
[Guest]: and in a way, you know, this is not an excuse for why the book is about six months late.
[Guest]: In fact, you know, my goal, my goal was for the book to be out around this time, around
[Guest]: the 75th year of independence. And like I was joking, you know, sometimes I feel instead
[Guest]: of writing a book, I should just do four episodes with you. So I'm glad we're recording and
[Guest]: putting out this episode, at least to coincide with that. But the book will be out in the
[Guest]: first or second quarter next year. But I think part of the reason the book has taken a little
[Guest]: longer is that it's not my main job to write the book. My main job is still to do research
[Guest]: and write papers. And these have also been among the most productive years research-wise
[Guest]: because of the sheer number of papers and projects that are happening, right? So we've
[Guest]: written this, you know, paper we've been working on for about six years on studying the general
[Guest]: equilibrium effects of NREGA, which is probably India's most important welfare program in
[Guest]: the past two decades, and where the research still continues to be, you know, inconclusive,
[Guest]: right, where there are papers that find x and minus x. So long story short, we can talk
[Guest]: more about that. But it's a paper that last summer, you know, just to give you a sense
[Guest]: of a life inside an academic's life, is that, you know, we got to revise and resubmit on
[Guest]: that paper from Econometrica, which is one of the most prestigious journals in the profession.
[Guest]: But we spent the entire summer, like basically two and a half months, right? I mean, we took
[Guest]: 11 months doing that revision. And with an 80-page single-space response to each of the
[Guest]: referees, that's the amount of scrutiny that happens to publish in a top peer-reviewed
[Guest]: journal in economics, right? So we submit the paper, we get very detailed referee reports
[Guest]: from, in this case, three referees, and the editor sent another five-page letter about
[Guest]: all the additional things he thought that we should do. And then a response at a top
[Guest]: journal requires you to hit every one of those points. And in any one of those things, it
[Guest]: required getting new data, doing new analysis, you know, having four additional appendices
[Guest]: where we are writing theoretical models of rural labour markets to then figure out, you
[Guest]: know, and quantify the parameters of what we were finding. So the point is that we are
[Guest]: still in that period where the core and most important thing in my life is doing research
[Guest]: and writing new papers, right? But coming back to the other part of what you said is
[Guest]: I've also been in this business for 15-20 years now, to feel that the value of a book
[Guest]: that brings it out of this kind of little hyper-specialised world of nano-academia and
[Guest]: taking these ideas more broadly, I think is important. And there I think I am, you know,
[Guest]: probably just temperamentally, right, I think well-suited to do that, because like I've
[Guest]: said, the motivation for the research has never been just to write kind of the AER Econometrica
[Guest]: paper, right? The motivation for the research has always been, are we kind of helping answer
[Guest]: questions that will help make policy better and thereby improve lives? And so there's
[Guest]: no conflict again. The only conflict in all of this is time, right? And so my, Danny Roderick
[Guest]: has these impossible trellis in international political economy. My impossible trellis in
[Guest]: terms of the work is quantity, quality and timeliness, okay? So you can do two out of
[Guest]: those three things. And the one that usually suffers is timeliness, because sometimes,
[Guest]: you know, because I'm doing a lot of stuff, and you hope that the work is of a very high
[Guest]: standard. And the problem sometimes in the academic enterprise is that I can block my
[Guest]: calendar to give myself time to do work, but I can't guarantee that the output is going
[Guest]: to be at my, that I'm going to be happy with it, right? And so, and which means sometimes
[Guest]: you've just got to go, you can spend five hours and write something and not be happy
[Guest]: with it, and you have to go back. And so yes, so that's kind of my long winded way of saying
[Guest]: like, you know, why is my book six or nine months late relative to kind of the original
[Guest]: plan? But, you know, the good news is that it is mostly done, you ask that question,
[Guest]: I think there's 18 chapters, there's a very, it's expanded from 14 to 18. For example,
[Guest]: the public finance chapter became so big, I had to split it into two, one in expenditure
[Guest]: and one in revenue. But you know, and then I think I had one in courts and cops, which
[Guest]: then expanded into one separate one on courts and justice and police and public safety.
[Guest]: But no, so you know, at some level, I beat myself up and saying, like, if only I'd been
[Guest]: more disciplined, like, you know, I would have gotten this thing done on time. But on
[Guest]: the other hand, I think hearing Shreyana saying, I think, you know, because she had a regular
[Guest]: job to that took like 10 years of interviews and notes to produce what has been I think
[Guest]: a masterpiece. So hopefully, like, you know, that that extra time is fine. And I shouldn't
[Guest]: beat myself up too much, given how much other stuff has been going on.
[Amit Varma]: You know, one of the things I really enjoy about our conversations is I get to learn
[Amit Varma]: new frameworks about sort of looking at the world and also your lovely metaphors like
[Amit Varma]: the hourglass metaphor is great. I think in the last episode, you spoke about an aeroplane,
[Amit Varma]: where you know, the elites are in first class and middle class and the poor are in you know,
[Amit Varma]: the elites are in first class and business class and the poor are in the economy seats,
[Amit Varma]: but it's one plane, it's all going to crash. And we'll come back to that. There's also
[Amit Varma]: a car from the 1950s metaphor in your book, which is beautiful. But you know, just to
[Amit Varma]: sort of take a mild digression, which may or may not interest you, because I don't know
[Amit Varma]: if you're interested in the creator economy, but that trilemma of quality, quantity and
[Amit Varma]: timeliness is really interesting. Because if you think of work as a series of projects,
[Amit Varma]: then I agree with you, I can't possibly meet all three. And sometimes matlab do bhi lag
[Amit Varma]: gaye toh bahut hai yaar. But the way the creator economy functions is that you take timeliness
[Amit Varma]: out of the equation by just doing something every day. So if you are a YouTube creator,
[Amit Varma]: like an Ali Abdaal or so many bloggers that I follow, you're bringing out videos every
[Amit Varma]: day or every second day. And so timeliness is taken care of and that quantity produces
[Amit Varma]: its own quality. Because just through constant iteration, you get better and better and better.
[Amit Varma]: And it's so much better than just planning, you know, taking a month planning a video
[Amit Varma]: and bringing it out and, you know, seeing quantity kaisai, quality kaisai. But that's
[Amit Varma]: just in the creator economy and in that particular concept, that particular context. But you
[Amit Varma]: know, if you take a sort of a more project oriented approach, it would be different and
[Amit Varma]: it would of course be different in different fields. I want to sort of, you know, go back
[Amit Varma]: to, you mentioned peer review and what your paper is kind of going through. And as someone
[Amit Varma]: who's inside academics, I, you know, I view academics with a lot of the field, not individuals
[Amit Varma]: like you, with a lot of suspicion, because there seems to me to be this giant academic
[Amit Varma]: circle going on and some of our best brains are being wasted there. And the peer review
[Amit Varma]: system seems to me to be like, I understand the reasons for which it was set up, but it
[Amit Varma]: seems a particular culprit, because it does a couple of things. One is that it crowds
[Amit Varma]: out the conventional, the unconventional rather, that everybody thinks in conventional ways,
[Amit Varma]: and there is this incentive to conform. So some people may not even try to think outside
[Amit Varma]: those boxes, because they just be rejected outright. I mean, we saw this, for example,
[Amit Varma]: in the nutrition sciences, for a bunch of decades, where you know, the sugar lobby funded
[Amit Varma]: studies by academicians from Harvard and elsewhere, like Ancel Keys, for example, that demonized
[Amit Varma]: fat and said sugar is completely fine. And that, in fact, led to the obesity epidemic
[Amit Varma]: in America. And now we know the science says exactly the opposite. But academia and peer
[Amit Varma]: review kept those great ideas out. And that's just one example that kind of comes to mind.
[Amit Varma]: But I think one cost is that it would keep unconventional ideas out and science needs
[Amit Varma]: those unconventional crazy ideas to get into the discussion to be able to proceed. And
[Amit Varma]: the other cost would be that your output would suffer because if you spent an inordinate
[Amit Varma]: amount of time revising a paper and conforming to some expectations, that's there's an opportunity
[Amit Varma]: cost. So you could have spent that time doing another paper or making YouTube videos for,
[Amit Varma]: you know, lay viewers to explain important concepts to them, but all of that doesn't
[Amit Varma]: happen. So as an insider, but you know, what do you think of this academic circle jerk
[Amit Varma]: as it were, and the whole peer review system?
[Guest]: No, I think, you know, you're touching on many, many, and again, it's good that I heard
[Guest]: so many past episodes, you know, so I'll pick up on multiple threads here. See, I think,
[Guest]: you know, you've talked about the value of say, in the creative economy, disintermediating
[Guest]: the gatekeepers, so to speak, right, like, you know, in many areas. But I think so let's
[Guest]: let's parse this down, right. So I think what you said about the, there's this piece about
[Guest]: the YouTuber creative economy, that person's economics versus say, my economics, right,
[Guest]: I mean, in terms of how I function, right. So I think the when you're in the creative
[Guest]: economy, right, you are just looking for the one vital hit, right? So you don't care about
[Guest]: your failures, you are kind of working a little bit like an early stage venture capitalist,
[Guest]: right? I mean, who's taking hundreds of bets, and you just want one to kind of really take
[Amit Varma]: off, right?
[Amit Varma]: Actually, no, no, I'll start to interrupt you. I normally don't. But that's not my assumption
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that that's not how the creative economy works. So creative economy is you
[Amit Varma]: build an organic following over time. And at the same time, while you're doing that,
[Amit Varma]: you up your up your quality. So you're not looking for the viral hit, you're just looking
[Amit Varma]: to gradually grow. And also, I didn't, my question about the peer review system was
[Guest]: completely separate. You know, you cannot possibly compare these two.
[Guest]: No, no, I agree. So I'm just going to connect all of these dots. So I'm just going to make
[Guest]: a very, very simple point, right? I mean, which is that, see, I think what happens is
[Guest]: academics is that and this is again, and maybe some of this is unfortunate, right? But there's
[Guest]: a certain amount of risk aversion that comes in because you are judged by kind of whatever
[Guest]: you put your name on. So I could write three great papers, but if I put my name on something
[Guest]: shoddy, then that actually has a huge reputational risk, right? And so, and there is definitely
[Guest]: a certain additional amount of risk aversion that comes with that. And that kind of gets
[Guest]: you to double check, triple check, quadruple check. Some of that is, you know, some of
[Guest]: that is good. Some of that is inefficient. Okay. But now let's come back to the broader
[Guest]: question you asked about peer review. I think there are some parts of peer review that are
[Guest]: definitely broken, okay? And other parts that I think are actually, you know, quite important
[Guest]: and necessary. And see, I think for the most part, the peer review system is very, very
[Guest]: important, right? So if you look at these three sets of referees, so let me say two
[Guest]: things, right? One is does peer review create more incentives for conformity, okay, rather
[Guest]: than novelty? Funnily enough, I think that is less true at the level of peer reviewing
[Guest]: a journal article and more true at the level of peer reviewing grant proposals, okay? And
[Guest]: that's because the people who are giving money tend to be risk averse. And so because they're
[Guest]: all bureaucrats, and this is true even in foundations, right? So I think there are people
[Guest]: now kind of starting to work on what's called meta-science, right? I mean, and looking at
[Guest]: how the scientific process itself is funded. So I think the risk aversion in peer review
[Guest]: matters more at the level of grant proposal funding. And that's because the bureaucrats
[Guest]: are, because it's, but it's not because of the peer review. It's because of the bureaucratic
[Guest]: incentives of the funding, okay? But my assessment is that when you have provocative results
[Guest]: that show up that you submit to a journal, it is not going to get rejected just for being
[Guest]: provocative. It'll get probed more, okay? So, and so that has happened, in fact, in
[Guest]: this NREGS paper that I'm talking about, because, you know, and we'll hopefully have more time
[Guest]: to talk about it even in the context of federalism, right? But, you know, I consider this perhaps
[Guest]: the most important paper I've ever written, and that's partly because it overturned my
[Guest]: own priors, right? So a lot of economists, including myself in the early 2000s, were
[Guest]: very sceptical of NREGA, okay? And we were thinking that, listen, this is going to be
[Guest]: make work, you're digging holes, refilling them up, and you're just going to be pushing
[Guest]: up, you know, you're pulling productive labour out of productive sectors and moving them
[Guest]: into unproductive stuff. This cannot be a good thing, okay? Now, but what our results
[Guest]: show with this very, very large-scale experiment was that improving NREGA implementation was
[Guest]: not only good for the poor in terms of improving, kind of, you know, their direct income from
[Guest]: NREGA, but it also had almost a 10x increase in their private incomes, because their wages
[Guest]: went up and private employment also went up, okay? Now, this runs contra to economic theory,
[Guest]: you don't, demand curve slope downwards, right? You don't get higher wages and higher employment.
[Guest]: And so that required, but, you know, so essentially, this is now too much in the weeds, right?
[Guest]: But we had this large-scale experiment that found that result, and then we thought, okay,
[Guest]: because this is an experiment, this result, you know, will go through in the top journals.
[Guest]: But I think the pushback we were getting was precisely because the result was provocative.
[Guest]: We were just being asked to go back and question, get other data sets and do a bunch of things.
[Guest]: And so I think that paper has improved immeasurably in that process. Now, it's taken four years,
[Guest]: okay? But that's why it's a completely different part of the ecosystem. The reason you have
[Guest]: academia, the reason you have, so, you know, I think there's a whole continuum of kind
[Guest]: of knowledge to practice, right, in society. And the reason you have the academic enterprise
[Guest]: is precisely to kind of do the long-term work that will, you know, because if I'm going
[Guest]: to come and say something as provocative as saying that, listen, this is a case where
[Guest]: you could boost wages and employment, that has dramatic implications for how we think
[Guest]: about certain classes of social welfare programs. And so I'm happy that we got pushed back a
[Guest]: lot, and I'm happy that we were forced to go look at other data sets, because I feel
[Guest]: much more robust about those results. So that part of peer review, I think, is a good thing.
[Guest]: The part of peer review that I think is broken and is a little frustrating, where I think
[Guest]: we could do well to look a little bit more like the creator economy, is the following.
[Guest]: Is that I think there are two aspects of the peer review process. One is, are the results
[Guest]: correct? The second is, are the results important? And my view is that most of the peer review
[Guest]: process should focus on the first question and not the second. But unfortunately what
[Guest]: happens is, because the prestige of publishing in the top journals is so high, that by the
[Guest]: time you're submitting a paper to the American Economic Review or Science or Nature or whatever,
[Guest]: chances are that the results are going to be broadly correct. So a lot of the efficiency
[Guest]: loss in this enterprise comes from, because of the very, very non-linear returns to publishing
[Guest]: in the top journals, that people are taking crapshoots, so the acceptance rate in the
[Guest]: top journals is 3%, which means for every one paper submitted, every 33, 32 are getting
[Guest]: rejected. But why do people do that? Because it's worth that moonshot of trying to get
[Guest]: into the very top journal. And out of those, I would say over half of those papers are
[Guest]: probably correct and therefore deserve to be published in a good peer review journal.
[Guest]: But a lot of the time in the process that's wasted and that's inefficient and where sometimes
[Guest]: cliques and others can form is in people's assessment of, is the work important? And
[Guest]: so that's where a lot of the judgement calls happen and a lot of the inefficiency happens.
[Guest]: In fact, there are papers that will get rejected in top journals and then will get published
[Guest]: perfectly fine and then over time, those papers will end up being sleeper hits. But one of
[Guest]: the ways I would like to reform peer review is to see if we can create platforms, and
[Guest]: the scientists are doing this. So Archive is an attempt to do this, whereby it's less
[Guest]: about journals and people just post the papers and you get kind of crowdsourced commentary
[Guest]: on the paper. So I think if we can separate the correctness from the importance, I think
[Guest]: that will really, really help a lot. And I think it will particularly help scholars,
[Guest]: and I know Vinay in his episode talked a little bit about the tension of academics living
[Guest]: in the US and catering to kind of a global audience versus academics in India, whose
[Guest]: work is often more contextually grounded and kind of relevant. But because global academia
[Guest]: fetishises generalisable concepts, if you submit a paper on India to a top journal,
[Guest]: you will only make it to a very top journal if you can place it in a broader conceptual
[Guest]: framework. And sometimes that, and Vinay, in fact, I met him in Delhi recently, we were
[Guest]: talking about cases of very successful academics in the US, but whose work may not necessarily
[Guest]: be fully contextually correct with India. But that's because it's not that they have
[Guest]: not, you know, and to be fair to them, it's not like they try to brush it under the carpet.
[Guest]: It's more like those nuances are not relevant to a global audience, and therefore it gets
[Guest]: taken out. Anyway, so I think the reason I'm getting into that little detour is because
[Guest]: I do get frustrated about aspects of academia. And if we could separate this whole, so if
[Guest]: you could have papers written by Indian scholars about India that are posted out there, where
[Guest]: kind of you get peer review that just says, okay, is this methodologically correct? And
[Guest]: often there will be like a lot of methodological issues that need to be called out. But don't
[Guest]: take that additional kind of judgment call of is this general interest, right? I mean,
[Guest]: so you can have peer review at the correctness level, and then let the marketplace kind of
[Guest]: decide the importance, right? I mean, so that's kind of how I would. So the part that's broken
[Guest]: in peer review is the confounding of those two. Whereas I do think peer review for correctness
[Guest]: is actually very, very important.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, what you point out about the top heavy nature of the peer review system
[Amit Varma]: that you want to get into these top journals, and it's a winner take all, you know, one
[Amit Varma]: out of 33 makes it, the other 32 don't. And obviously, the difference between the one
[Amit Varma]: who made it and the 5 or 10 below him immediately that didn't make it will be negligible. But
[Amit Varma]: the difference in outcome is vast. And that would lead me to thinking that it is an incentive
[Amit Varma]: problem, you know? So my question, therefore, is, is what are the rewards? Like, what are
[Amit Varma]: the rewards for publishing in a top journal, as opposed to say, just uploading your paper
[Amit Varma]: on your blog, for example? You know, what are the rewards? And why are they that way?
[Guest]: Yeah, so I think the problem with uploading the paper on the blog is because then you
[Guest]: have, you know, people can say anything, okay? And there's no assessment of whether something
[Guest]: is correct or not. And the problem is, as work gets more technical, you really do need
[Guest]: peer review, right? I mean, you know, so which is why, in top conferences, what you will
[Guest]: have is, top conferences, when a paper gets accepted, you will also have a discussant,
[Guest]: okay? And the entire job of the discussant is to provide the public good for the community
[Guest]: of scholars, of having been the person who has dived into the paper in great detail,
[Guest]: and then presenting kind of a 10-minute or 15-minute discussion, which is almost like
[Guest]: a public referee report of the paper, okay? Like, I mean, here is what is good, here is
[Guest]: what kind of is weak, right? So, and I think that's why just posting on the website doesn't
[Guest]: quite do it.
[Guest]: So, now, the returns to publication, I think when you publish in the very, very, very top
[Guest]: places, like, you know, so tenure in the top departments is all, because again, the reason
[Guest]: you fetishise the general interest journal is, even in an economics department like mine,
[Guest]: you've got people, and every discipline, and this is even truer in the sciences, where
[Guest]: you've gotten so super specialised, right, that people don't even understand their own
[Guest]: colleagues' work, okay? So, you know, I don't understand half of what my econometrics colleagues
[Guest]: are doing, right? I mean, so there's theorists, there's econometricians, there is macroeconomists,
[Guest]: there is development economists, there's public finance people. So, even in economics department,
[Guest]: while there are certain kind of common tools of how we think about the world, kind of evaluating
[Guest]: the intricacies of work is often something that not everybody can do, right? So, then
[Guest]: when it comes to decisions for tenure, and promotion, and stuff like that, you tend to
[Guest]: rely partly on the publication process for a validation of, you know, is this work perceived
[Guest]: as truly general interest? But again, this is, at UCSD, for example, one of the things
[Guest]: we pride ourselves on is because we're not a big private school that can throw money
[Guest]: at everybody we want, we actually spend a lot of time reading papers and trying to identify,
[Guest]: so we're a bit like the Oakland A's in academia, right? Like, you know, if you remember Moneyball,
[Guest]: right, of identifying the underpriced assets whose work is better than kind of what they're
[Guest]: getting credit for, and kind of, you know, make those bets early. And that's been a key
[Guest]: to kind of how we have, I think, conditional and budget, we're probably the best department
[Guest]: in the world, because it's this poor public university relative to, but, you know, there's
[Guest]: always this thing about needing to read the papers and form your own judgments. So, to
[Guest]: go to your question, the returns to publishing in the top places are a certain amount of
[Guest]: additional validation in the profession, as this is general interest, and a lot of the
[Guest]: downstream benefits of tenure and stuff in top departments flow from that. Now, to be
[Guest]: fair, and this is why I think it's not as broken as we think it is, right, because if
[Guest]: you publish in a series of top field journals, okay, you will still get tenure. I mean, it
[Guest]: just won't be like in a top 10 or top 15 department, but you will still have a respectable academic
[Guest]: career, be able to do research, be able to, you know, be a very productive, contributing
[Guest]: member of the research community. But yes, because a lot of academia is status-obsessed,
[Guest]: and I say this, I took an 80 to 90% cut in lifetime income going from my corporate consulting
[Guest]: job to academia, right, but it's not like, you know, in the private sector, if you look
[Guest]: at, say, investment bankers, right, beyond a point, the bonuses are not about what they
[Guest]: do with the money. It's just a measure of self-validation, right, because it's a metric
[Guest]: on which you validate yourself, and therefore you feel good about yourself, even if you
[Guest]: have no idea what you're going to do with the money, right? And academics, in some ways,
[Guest]: right, I mean, you've just replaced that currency with kind of a currency of prestige, right?
[Guest]: I mean, so you're still kind of playing that same game, but in a different sphere, and
[Guest]: which is quite suboptimal, right? And I think which is why, in a way, what I'm enjoying
[Guest]: about writing the book and all of this kind of stuff is just, I mean, and overall in my
[Guest]: career, I feel incredibly fortunate to have kind of, you know, found mentors, found colleagues
[Guest]: and people who've kind of valued the long-term nature of what I do and given me that kind
[Guest]: of, you know, long-term runway. And so I feel it's all kind of come together quite nicely,
[Guest]: and I have no regrets about anything. And so this is just a way of opening up the black
[Guest]: box of the academic enterprise a little bit to you. And it's interesting that you talked
[Guest]: about frameworks. I think one thing I noticed in later episodes is you talk about, let me
[Guest]: double-click on that, and that may have been something I had mentioned about, you know,
[Guest]: in a conversation with preparing candidates for their job market interviews, saying that
[Guest]: have a front page. And when your listener double-clicks, you need to go like five pages
[Guest]: in. So yes, maybe these frameworks, you know, are translating subliminally.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah, yeah, who knows? I mean, floating around in sort of interesting ways. So we
[Amit Varma]: should talk about the book, we really should talk about the book now. And I'll get to that.
[Amit Varma]: But before that, something struck me from what you said about your paper. And of course,
[Amit Varma]: we'll talk about your paper at the end. Because when you say something like it's the most
[Amit Varma]: important paper I've done, hello, you know, I want to talk about it for five hours. But
[Amit Varma]: after we sort of do the groundwork and talk about federalism, that's perhaps the best
[Amit Varma]: time to kind of talk about it. But one of the things that you said when you spoke about
[Amit Varma]: the paper is how it made you re-examine your priors. And that brought to mind something
[Amit Varma]: that you said in the opening chapter of your book somewhere near the very beginning, where
[Amit Varma]: you speak about how you were sort of both a scientist and an engineer, when you went
[Amit Varma]: into this book, a scientist in the sense that you're understanding theory, formulating theories,
[Amit Varma]: figuring out first principles of how things work, and an engineer in the sense that you're
[Amit Varma]: actually growing out there in the ground examining the machine, trying to build the machine,
[Amit Varma]: trying to tinker with it, which is such a beautiful combination. And obviously, you
[Amit Varma]: know, the engineering, you would often update the priors of the scientistry, which is how
[Amit Varma]: it goes and which is sort of the healthy interaction. Now, that's something I want to ask about.
[Amit Varma]: Because what happens is that when you put your scientist hat on the theories that we
[Amit Varma]: use to look at the world, to explain the world to ourselves and to others, we can sometimes
[Amit Varma]: get attached to them. And, you know, and that might affect how we do our empirical work,
[Amit Varma]: no matter how much we tell ourselves that, hey, I'm being objective and all somewhere
[Amit Varma]: your reptile brain is saying, don't mess with me, this is who I am. You know, these are
[Amit Varma]: my sort of priors, as it were. And in your work, you know, the only ideology I find in
[Amit Varma]: your work, and I mean, this is a compliment, is the ideology of how the hell do I make
[Amit Varma]: things work, right? Figure out what's wrong, figure out ways to make them work. But how
[Amit Varma]: do you deal with this sort of tension between a scientist and an engineer within yourself?
[Amit Varma]: And do you feel that this actually bedevils the field, because most people would fall
[Amit Varma]: on one side or the other, you know, they'd either be the theoretician who would not be
[Amit Varma]: able to, you know, move away from whatever their priors are, for example. And then there
[Amit Varma]: would be the empiricists who might like the big picture, who might look at something not
[Amit Varma]: working, figure out a way to, you know, fix it at that particular granular level at which
[Amit Varma]: they see it, but not be able to shift from the worm's eye view to the bird's eye view.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, what's your sense of that process within yourself? Do you think you went wrong
[Amit Varma]: in the past in one extreme or the other? You know, how have you reconciled both of these?
[Guest]: Yes, I think, I mean, so to be honest, the tension there is, I think, less about scientists
[Guest]: versus engineer, and I think it's there within both frames, right? Because I think the issue
[Guest]: you raise is more about you go in with priors, you go in with beliefs, and then how do you
[Guest]: deal when the data kind of, you know, is not supporting that. And so I think going back
[Guest]: to my own ideology, I would say, you know, the ideology really is that of an empiricist,
[Guest]: right? I mean, which is kind of really let the data, you know, so, and like I say, having
[Guest]: an open mind, I have an open mind, but having an open mind is not the same as having an
[Guest]: empty mind, right? I mean, and so, you know, so you do want to go in. And I think somebody,
[Guest]: I think somebody at Stanford, right, famously said that, you know, really, the way you want
[Guest]: to approach the world is strong beliefs weakly held, right? I mean, so, you know, you go
[Guest]: in with a certain set of frameworks, but you're not so wedded to them that you don't change
[Guest]: your mind when the facts kind of suggest otherwise, right? And so, but I think that's the right
[Guest]: approach to any kind of enterprise, particularly academia. And that is true, whether you're
[Guest]: a scientist or whether you're an engineer, right? I think the scientist-engineer dichotomy,
[Guest]: I meant was slightly different, in the sense that it's not about theory and empirics, right?
[Guest]: Because even within science, you have theory and empirics, and even within engineering,
[Guest]: you have theory and empirics. So the distinction is not that. The distinction is that the scientist
[Guest]: is focused on understanding the world, not changing it, right? I mean, whereas the engineer
[Guest]: is focused on how do I take these principles that I'm learning from the science and kind
[Guest]: of build a better mousetrap, right? So it's not the theory and empirics as much as kind
[Guest]: of the learning versus doing. That's the dichotomy, which I think is more relevant. And I think
[Guest]: that framework actually comes from, I think last time I had this Mankiw quote on profoundly
[Guest]: and naively confused, and this actually also comes from a Greg Mankiw piece, and I think
[Guest]: it's a JEP piece in 2006 called Macroeconomist, a Scientist and Engineer. And so, yeah, I
[Guest]: think that's, and I cite that in the footnote as kind of where the terminology comes from.
[Guest]: But yeah, in a way, what I'm trying to do with the book is because, again, so my assessment
[Guest]: of books on governance and stuff in India, and again, maybe this is a little too self-congratulatory
[Guest]: or at least, you know, you need a little delusion as to say, what am I adding to this marketplace
[Guest]: in terms of why am I taking this effort to write the book? So my sense of what I'm hopefully
[Guest]: trying to do here is there are excellent descriptive accounts of kind of the failures of the Indian
[Guest]: state, right? So, for example, I love Shankar Raiya's book on the Gated Republic, if you
[Guest]: haven't seen that. So yeah, it's this wonderful book that just says how the collapse of public
[Guest]: service delivery has kind of caused most elites to seek private solutions, and how that's
[Guest]: kind of a bit of a vicious cycle. The journalist Rajshekhar has a nice recent book called Despite
[Guest]: the State, where he's kind of, again, having a very nice descriptive account of the dysfunction
[Guest]: of the state, right, on the ground, right? So the journalistic accounts are excellent
[Guest]: in kind of providing a thick description of what's going on. But I mean, they themselves
[Guest]: will admit that they don't necessarily know what the solutions are, right? I mean, as
[Guest]: much as just kind of bringing to light what the nature of the problem is, right? Then
[Guest]: I think you've got very good, thoughtful books by retired bureaucrats, people who've been
[Guest]: in the system, you know, and who kind of will both kind of write about their personal experiences,
[Guest]: right, and certain, you know, reform ideas that's coming exponentially. But the limitation
[Guest]: there is it's typically not grounded in research, right? It's very, very much kind of experiential,
[Guest]: which is very valuable, right? It's a part of the conversation, but it's one part of
[Guest]: that, so to speak. And then you might have kind of books by academics that are a little
[Guest]: bit more conceptual, but are not kind of as grounded in terms of how difficult it is,
[Guest]: you know, what are the political economy constraints? What is kind of the life of a frontline bureaucrat
[Guest]: like when you're trying to do something? And so what I'm hoping to do here is kind of thread
[Guest]: those needles by kind of having a book on state capacity. And the one thing, in fact,
[Guest]: that is still to be determined is kind of the title of the book itself. I can tell you,
[Guest]: like, you know, what the book is, but I've still not landed on a title that I'm fully
[Guest]: happy with, right? Because then we can come back and talk about that as we talk about
[Guest]: the outline of the book. But what I'm hoping to do here is have an analytical narrative
[Guest]: of the Indian state that both informs in terms of describing key facts, but also presents
[Guest]: frameworks to make sense of why we are the way we are. And then once we understand that
[Guest]: why and then you say, okay, why are we ready to make the change? Then you get into the
[Guest]: granularity of now, what should you actually do? That's kind of based on theory and practice.
[Guest]: Anyway, so that's kind of my hope of what I'm doing. But the challenge in this, it has
[Guest]: become I think, a five to maybe even 600 page book, right? So it is, it is, you know, and
[Guest]: again, I'm, yeah, I'm trying to not beat myself up on the delays, like a colleague of mine
[Guest]: in Chicago wrote this very nice book on conflict called Why We Fight. And I think, you know,
[Guest]: it took him about three years, and that book is about 300 pages. So you know, the fact
[Guest]: that at three years, I'm close to done with a 500 plus page book means I feel good. But
[Guest]: the book is mainly done, it should be out in the Q1, Q2 2023. But the draft is essentially
[Amit Varma]: done.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, can't wait to read it. And one small request I will make, and I'm sure all my listeners
[Amit Varma]: will also share this is, please do not cut any word just because a publisher asks you
[Amit Varma]: to. If you feel something needs to be cut, and you need to make it more concise, go ahead
[Amit Varma]: as long as it's coming from you. But please, you know, if a publisher says, nahin yaar
[Amit Varma]: yeh 10,000 word kaat do or cut a 100,000, please don't do that. Like one of the one
[Amit Varma]: of my great sort of one of the great tragedies of literature is a wonderful book by Robert
[Amit Varma]: Caro called The Power Broker, which is, it's a masterpiece, right? It's it's what 900,000
[Amit Varma]: words, but the tragedy is that it was more than a million words and 100,000 word section
[Amit Varma]: that got cut out of the book was on Jane Jacobs, who is, you know, who is one of my heroes
[Amit Varma]: and who kind of fought with Robert Moses, who was the subject of his great book. And
[Amit Varma]: to me, that is such a tragedy. And I keep thinking that we are now in the age of the
[Amit Varma]: internet, everything is digital, do a freaking data dump, please put those 100,000 words
[Amit Varma]: back on man, it's such, it's such a treasure, and they don't do that. So anyway, so that's
[Amit Varma]: a digression and a pet peeve that in this day and age, your book, which will be so invaluable
[Amit Varma]: as a repository of wisdom, please don't cut any words from it. But you know, a final sort
[Amit Varma]: of broader question about the book before we, you know, dive into the first chapter,
[Amit Varma]: which is that why the subject of the Indian state as a whole, like what you did, what
[Amit Varma]: you've done with this book is you've taken on this very ambitious remit that of course,
[Amit Varma]: we have with this functional state, but let's look deeper and look at all it's a separate
[Amit Varma]: constituent, you know, fault lines and dig deep into that. And it could have been so
[Amit Varma]: tempting for you, I guess, to write the definitive book on education, which you know, so well,
[Amit Varma]: or healthcare, which you know, so well, or take any of these areas, the danger in doing
[Amit Varma]: a vast book like that, is you might feel that inevitably, there'll be some subjects, you
[Amit Varma]: know, an incredible amount on, you know, having done both the science and the engineering
[Amit Varma]: as it were, but other subjects, perhaps, not so much. So what was that process in which
[Amit Varma]: that book took shape in your head? Give me a little insight into that.
[Guest]: I think, you know, the, see, over the years, obviously, so my work in education itself
[Guest]: started not in education, but started as part of this iconic world development report in
[Guest]: 2003 called making public services work for the poor. Okay, so the context of my first
[Guest]: studies on all India studies on teacher absenteeism and doctor absenteeism in the public sector,
[Guest]: was very much motivated by this question of making services work. I mean, so, and so while
[Guest]: I went deeper into education, and like I mentioned, last time, Jeshnu and Jeff and others went
[Guest]: into health, I came back to health, and then I started working on design and delivery of
[Guest]: welfare programs, you know, the threads were just so obvious, right? I mean, that, you
[Guest]: know, so one way to say this is that, and I'll come back when I talk about seizures
[Guest]: to the end, right, is if I was a trade economist, okay, I could have a lot of impact by just
[Guest]: changing certain policy frameworks with regard to how we think about openness of the economy,
[Guest]: right? And then once you do that, at the policy level, the change pretty much happens, because
[Guest]: you're changing a tariff, you're changing enforcement, and then the private market will
[Guest]: respond, okay? But if you're talking about reforming, really complex subjects like education,
[Guest]: the issue there is not just changing a policy framework or passing a law or even increasing
[Guest]: the budget, right? The issues there really have to do with frontline state capacity,
[Guest]: and how does the state actually deliver on these core services? And given the time I've
[Guest]: spent on the ground across sectors, it is just so obvious that the issues are the same
[Guest]: across, that intellectually, I was almost more excited about writing a book on the state
[Guest]: than about education. And that's because an education book would be, you know, it would
[Guest]: have a lot in it, right? But the core challenge, like I said, I mean, you know, 2012, the 12th
[Guest]: Five-Year Plan already had the language about, you know, needing to prioritize basic foundational
[Guest]: literacy numeracy skills. But seven years later, we still hadn't made any headway. And
[Guest]: then new education policy, you know, it says all the right things, and we're doing things.
[Guest]: But you know, when I look at what's happening on the ground, and we can talk about education,
[Guest]: a lot of good work is happening. But it is still very much supply side, in the sense
[Guest]: that here is a program, here is a policy, here is some content, and we're going to push
[Guest]: this down and hope that outcomes are going to happen, okay? Whereas I'm not in any way,
[Guest]: you know, assured that those outcomes are going to happen without putting in some of
[Guest]: the governance reforms, right? I mean, which I'm talking about in the book. So anyway,
[Guest]: so I think, I don't think, again, there was a tension there at all. So it's true that
[Guest]: I started writing, when I started writing, there was a narrower focus perhaps on a few
[Guest]: sectors in service delivery. But because I've been teaching a course in the Indian economy
[Guest]: for the past six years, and there's an interesting actual intellectual aside over here, right,
[Guest]: which is about eight years, 2008 to 2016, I used to teach a development economics class,
[Guest]: right? And then 2016, I said, okay, let me go create a new class in the Indian economy.
[Guest]: And I thought the demand would be much lower. My mother was very surprised, California,
[Guest]: why are you teaching an Indian economy class? But the class was not only as popular, but
[Guest]: my kind of student evaluations in the Indian economy class were even higher, okay, than
[Guest]: in the development economy class, even though only 20% of the students had any connection
[Guest]: to India. And part of the reason was that when you teach development economics, you
[Guest]: end up taking some examples from Latin America, some from Africa, some from South Asia, some
[Guest]: from Southeast Asia, and just illustrating a bunch of concepts. Whereas here, I was teaching
[Guest]: it not as kind of here's a bunch of facts on India, I was teaching it as an applied
[Guest]: development economics class taught through the lens of the Indian experience. And so
[Guest]: then what happens is, you have a certain amount of institutional, cultural, historical continuity
[Guest]: within which to locate all of this stuff, right? So I think in teaching that class,
[Guest]: I had also started seeing patterns across everything about, you know, the Indian state.
[Guest]: And so often many books by academics kind of are a product of their teaching, right?
[Guest]: Because it's when you teach that you kind of put together a bunch of thoughts and frameworks.
[Guest]: So there's been no tension that way again, you know, I think the tension, I think the
[Guest]: main tension has just been the fact that everything is interconnected. And so there was a moment
[Guest]: when people were reading the chapters, you know, I have a small circle of kind of colleagues
[Guest]: and others, like, you know, who are reading the chapters and giving me feedback. And,
[Guest]: you know, some people have said, why don't you consider splitting it into two volumes,
[Guest]: because there is just so much content in each, like each of these 30 page chapters could
[Guest]: be a book, right? I mean, we've done episodes just on each chapter, but breaking it into
[Guest]: two, I think would not work, because the strength of this guy is, again, the interconnections,
[Guest]: right? So if you think about in a network, the number of nodes, the number of pairwise
[Guest]: connections is increasing quadratically, right, as the number of things, so cutting half the
[Guest]: book would actually cut 75% of the value, because you would not make the linkages across
[Guest]: two volumes, right? So anyway, so I am doing what you've said, it is, you know, channeling
[Guest]: seen in the unseen kind of long episodes, right? Like, you know, and it'll hopefully,
[Guest]: hopefully, hopefully be worth it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, so glad to hear that. And it's interesting that, you know, even you're kind of getting
[Amit Varma]: into the field and deciding to write this book as an hourglass structure where you write
[Amit Varma]: with a broad article about services, and you go into the, you know, the stem of the hourglass
[Amit Varma]: and you into education and healthcare, and then you come out and there's this kind of
[Amit Varma]: grand book. And I completely agree. I mean, I think, you know, one should think of a book
[Amit Varma]: and perhaps even a big podcast episode or a series or whatever, as an insight machine.
[Amit Varma]: And in this particular case, I wouldn't want a machine broken into three parts and where
[Amit Varma]: I have to do the job of, you know, bringing them together myself, you know, I mean, it's
[Amit Varma]: a very bad metaphor, I'm not as good as you, but in the sense of, you know, you know, I
[Amit Varma]: think having one book like that, nothing edited, everything as you mean it to be is really
[Amit Varma]: a public service. And again, I can't wait. Let's now, you know, what I sort of really
[Amit Varma]: enjoyed about the book and enjoyed about your wonderful first chapter, which I think is
[Guest]: by the way, I've only sent you two chapters, right? I haven't sent you the book. Because
[Guest]: I knew if I sent you everything, we will be talking about everything. I sent you the intro.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah, no, the intro is fantastic. And I will eventually read everything. And hopefully
[Amit Varma]: we will do many more episodes together some in person. But what I kind of loved about
[Amit Varma]: it is that the way you you know, the opening chapter sort of you unpeel the layers of this
[Amit Varma]: onion of the Indian state. Like first we talk about what is it good at? What is it bad at?
[Amit Varma]: What are the problem areas? You know, you get a great metaphor, which we'll go back
[Amit Varma]: into, but you talk about the what, the why, the how, you know, what can we do all of that,
[Amit Varma]: which is great. Let's start by talking about what the Indian state is good at and what
[Amit Varma]: it is not good at. And you briefly mentioned, you mentioned at great length, I am briefly
[Amit Varma]: sort of restating that you say that the Indian state is great at mission mode, but terrible
[Amit Varma]: at when it comes to essential services. So unpack that for us.
[Guest]: And, you know, I think, again, as the timing of this is wonderful, as we look at 75 years
[Guest]: of independence, and just take stock of, you know, where we are as a country, you know,
[Guest]: what have we done well, where can we do better? And I think even before I get into that specific
[Guest]: question in the Indian state, it is worth kind of, and this is not just a homily, right?
[Guest]: I mean that I'm doing the first two paragraphs kind of talking about the positives. You know,
[Guest]: it is so easy to kind of get pessimistic and beat down about all of the challenges we face,
[Guest]: right? But, you know, I think in any sense, hence a historical perspective, India is a
[Guest]: spectacular success, is a spectacular success, right? So the political project that's modern
[Guest]: India, and we'll come back to this when we talk about federalism, right? I mean, and,
[Guest]: you know, multiple people talk about how when the British left, the betting was that India
[Guest]: is not going to survive, you know, as a unified country. So the political project of modern
[Guest]: India has been an astounding success, right? So there's obviously warts, it's incomplete,
[Guest]: we've got, you know, your wonderful episode with Joey Joseph and the security state, like,
[Guest]: you know, so there's many, many, many areas, right? Like, you know, where we have a long
[Guest]: way to go, right? But given where we started, I think, so my assessment of India is if we
[Guest]: were to grade ourselves, we would be a very solid B plus, okay? A very solid B plus, and
[Guest]: in some areas, even an A minus, okay, like, you know, but we're in the B plus A minus
[Guest]: range. And in fact, in Chapter 10, when I talk about accelerating India's development,
[Guest]: one of the really important things I do there is to say, let's look at every development
[Guest]: outcome in both across countries and across states and kind of just plot this with GDP
[Guest]: per capita, right? And how are you doing relative to what you would expect at your GDP per capita?
[Guest]: And India does exactly as predicted, okay? And in some cases, slightly better, okay?
[Guest]: So I think the important point to keep in mind is that the political project that India
[Guest]: has been an astounding success, and similarly, the economy, right? I mean, we have been the
[Guest]: fastest growing large democracy in the world for a very, very long time, right? So there
[Guest]: are a few countries that have grown faster, and we can talk about India and China and
[Guest]: stuff like that later. But you know, the only democracy that's grown faster than India is
[Guest]: Botswana that has a population that's 1 500th that of India, okay, like, you know, or Costa
[Guest]: Rica, which is, you know, smaller than some average Indian city, right? So the the scale
[Guest]: of kind of the economic growth that's been delivered at the scale, poverty reduction
[Guest]: from 70% at independence to 20%, like, you know, in 2011, you know, these are these are
[Guest]: astounding achievements, okay? And we should be really, really proud of where we are as
[Guest]: a country. But again, I wouldn't be writing this book if it was just about clapping and
[Guest]: praising ourselves. You know, the overall story is, if I was a professor grading India
[Guest]: would say can do better. So, you know, hence the B plus. So and then coming to the Indian
[Guest]: state itself, right, the Indian state is again, in many ways, I mean, it is amazing what it
[Guest]: does at the level of resourcing it has, right? It runs the world's largest elections. You
[Guest]: know, if you look at kind of, I mean, US elections are frankly, like, I mean, it's an embarrassment,
[Guest]: right? I mean, compared to, you know, how well Indian elections are run. India does
[Guest]: disaster relief incredibly well. So when Katrina happened, and folks from the US, I think,
[Guest]: came to India to see, you know, there were some discussions about sharing best practices.
[Guest]: I think the Indian disaster relief operations are so good that, you know, what took the
[Guest]: US guys close to 48 to 72 hours to do in India, we managed to put in place in four hours,
[Guest]: okay? And that's because, you know, whether it's earthquakes, whether it's tsunamis,
[Guest]: whether it's other natural disasters, right? I mean, the Indian system is just really,
[Guest]: really good at kind of, you know, cracking those things. You know, we do the Kumbh
[Guest]: Mela, which is the world's largest kind of collection of human beings in one place, right?
[Guest]: I mean, I manage all of that. We do the world's largest vaccination campaigns, right? So the
[Guest]: Indian state is remarkably impressive in some ways, right? But at the same time, you know,
[Guest]: we're obviously not delivering on core, core, core services, right? So whether it's education,
[Guest]: and again, the scale of these challenges is just monumental, right? So, you know, we have
[Guest]: the world's largest number of children at age 10 who can't read, we have the world's
[Guest]: largest number of malnourished children. So, you know, in education, you've spent kind
[Guest]: of hundreds of thousands of crores and still have 50% of your rural population not even
[Guest]: able to read at the end of fifth class of education. And that's kind of both a moral
[Guest]: and an economic tragedy. Health, you've got, like I said, the largest number of malnourished
[Guest]: children, you've got 70% of kind of healthcare is fee charging private and 70% of them are
[Guest]: quacks, okay, as we've talked about. So about 50% of healthcare in this country is delivered
[Guest]: by completely unqualified quacks. You've got 13 of the 15 most polluted cities in the world,
[Guest]: right? The police and public safety is kind of, again, you know, it's again a mixed bag
[Guest]: in the sense that, you know, core law and order has been maintained, right? So we've
[Guest]: not had a general breakdown in law and order, right? I mean, so again, the glass is always
[Guest]: half full, right? I mean, and then, you know, and even in nutrition and things, right? We
[Guest]: have seen significant reductions in infant mortality, significant reductions in maternal
[Guest]: mortality, significant improvements in stunting. It's just that we've not done it as fast as
[Guest]: we could, right? And hence the can do better. Okay, so, and I'll come back to what the core
[Guest]: of that is. Okay, and then, you know, you talk about police, right? I think less than,
[Guest]: you know, in many cases, the police can't even reach the crime scene, let alone solve
[Guest]: it, right? So again, Hindi movies are ahead of, you know, they capture reality well, there's
[Guest]: a reason why the police always shows up in the last scene, right? Like, you know, because
[Guest]: that is reality. Okay, and I think estimates are that less than only about 10% of crimes
[Guest]: actually get reported, right? I mean, so again, and one metric of kind of policing is that
[Guest]: does the average citizen feel more reassured or feel more nervous when you see a policeman?
[Guest]: Okay, like, I mean, and we have data to show that you're actually more scared of seeing
[Guest]: a policeman than feeling the same, which again, suggests going back to Joey's, you know, lovely
[Guest]: book and episode is that we haven't made that transition from a security state that's trying
[Guest]: to rule the people to kind of a modern democratic state that's designed to serve people, right?
[Guest]: I mean, so that's in quotes, you know, we all know about the backlogs, we all know about,
[Guest]: you know, 30 million plus cases, a million cases getting added every year. But you know,
[Guest]: again, and I'll come back to why I'm picking these sectors, right, in terms of instrumental
[Guest]: and intrinsic importance. But I think one fact that people don't fully appreciate is
[Guest]: almost two thirds of people in prison in India are under trial. Okay, so these are not convicted
[Guest]: folks but are being held there because of the slowness of the judicial system, right?
[Guest]: So it gives you, again, a sense of the magnitude of the problem we have. Okay, then, you know,
[Guest]: there's similar challenges with regard to the design and delivery of welfare programs
[Guest]: with jobs. So, you know, the core challenge of the Indian state therefore, there are some,
[Guest]: so how do you make sense of this? So Devesh Kapoor has a nice piece on, in the Journal
[Guest]: of Economic Perspectives, on why does the Indian state both succeed and fail at the
[Guest]: same time, right? I mean, and he's got a bunch of arguments and, you know, the core of my
[Guest]: argument is very, very, very simple, right? It's that we have dramatically under-invested
[Guest]: in the capacity of the Indian state to meet the expectations of its people, okay? And
[Guest]: that's kind of what, and I'll tell you, and this is true at every level, right? It's true
[Guest]: at the level of data and systems, it's true at the level of people, public sector personnel,
[Guest]: it's true in how we spend our money. But the core challenge, when we make sense of, you
[Guest]: know, where India is, and I talked a little bit about this in the health episode, but
[Guest]: this is what chapter two is about, is that what democracy before development has meant
[Guest]: is that we are, it's a wonderful moral achievement, right? Because it's given people a voice in
[Guest]: the state well before, say, the US or UK or other countries that we call democracies.
[Guest]: I mean, these were all really kind of, you know, almost fake partial democracies, right?
[Guest]: That had votes for 20% of the population. So Indian democracy is the signature achievement,
[Guest]: right? That we should all be proud of. But it has created two fundamental tensions, right?
[Guest]: So the first is a public finance challenge, which is that because the demand for welfare
[Guest]: and the voter demand and political supply of welfare has happened at a much lower level
[Guest]: of per capita income, that has meant that you haven't had the resources to invest in
[Guest]: the core capacity of the state itself, okay? So, and this is not, you know, it's not a
[Guest]: question of good or bad, it is a question of trade-offs, right? I mean, that there is
[Guest]: a fixed pie, okay? And as a country, we have to make a choice about how are we investing
[Guest]: our resources. And ideally, and I talk a lot about this in the social protection chapter,
[Guest]: is you want to invest in ways that promote both equity and efficiency, okay? So the problem
[Guest]: is not welfare spending. The problem is that we are doing welfare spending on such a weak
[Guest]: administrative structure, that the quality of that spending is so poor, okay, that the
[Guest]: translation of the spending into outcomes is really weak, okay? So, and I mean, there's
[Guest]: a reason I'm writing this entire book, but the core point, therefore, is the Indian state
[Guest]: can succeed in mission mode, because all of its resources are allocated to one problem
[Guest]: in a time-bound way. And then you can get it done, because, you know, you have the resources,
[Guest]: you get it done, and you're focused on that outcome. But when it comes to the day-to-day
[Guest]: functioning of the state, it is just fundamentally under-resourced relative to the expectations
[Guest]: on the state. Now, it's not just a question of saying, let's hire more people, let's increase
[Guest]: the budgets for health and education. It's because the efficiency of that is also really,
[Guest]: really poor, okay? So, and I think, so one way of characterizing, you know, the big-picture
[Guest]: argument of the book is that, see, in study after study after study, and this is where,
[Guest]: when I talk about tying the threads across multiple RCTs, right? So, whether it's education,
[Guest]: whether it's health, whether it's now, you know, there's a postdoc working with me who
[Guest]: has this lovely paper on courts, is that you, we estimate that the returns to investing
[Guest]: in governance and state capacity, the public returns, are often 10 to 20 times higher than
[Guest]: spending more on the program itself, correct? So, most of our policy discourse happens at
[Guest]: the level of budget allocation, which sector should get more, which sector should get less,
[Guest]: but we're not spending any time thinking about how does that spending translate into outcomes,
[Guest]: correct? So, if what you care about as a policymaker is how do I deliver outcomes for citizens,
[Guest]: you can do that two ways, right? You can say, I can spend more money, or you can say I can
[Guest]: improve the effectiveness of the delivery system and the capacity to do that, and what
[Guest]: study after study is showing is that the returns to kind of investing in that capacity is going
[Guest]: to be 10 times higher, right? So, and in a way, the core intellectual argument I'm making
[Guest]: for the country, right, is to say that, so here's a different way of saying this, right,
[Guest]: is that we care about development, we care about health, we care about education, we
[Guest]: care about safety, and if you look at any, like I said, cross-country or cross-state
[Guest]: relationship, there's always a positive relationship between income and human development, okay?
[Guest]: And so, the way in that correlation what has happened is you get the two, the great debate
[Guest]: in development has kind of been, you know, the Bhagwati-Sen debate, right? So, you've
[Guest]: got the Jagdish Bhagwati-Arvind Panagriha view that says, listen, in the long term,
[Guest]: growth is the most important thing, right? So, you get 2% higher growth rates for 20
[Guest]: years, and you will automatically do better on a whole range of these development outcomes.
[Guest]: And the contrast with kind of the Amartya Sen-Jean Drez view is that, you know, you
[Guest]: don't have to get weight to get rich, okay, before you can deliver better human development
[Guest]: outcomes, okay? And they focus on that, right? And so, now, at some level, both arguments
[Guest]: are true, because in the long term, better human development helps growth, and better
[Guest]: growth helps human development, okay? So, in practice, what this debate has translated
[Guest]: to is that the time of budget allocation, do you allocate more money for, say, roads
[Guest]: and railways and physical infrastructure that may promote growth, or do you allocate more
[Guest]: for the social sector? And traditionally, what has happened is that centre-left governments
[Guest]: have tended to do more on the social sector, centre-right governments have tended to do
[Guest]: more on capex, okay? But the truth in a country like India is that that swing is not wide,
[Guest]: okay? It's a relatively narrow swing here and there, right? So, I think my biggest intellectual
[Guest]: point of departure in this book is to say that that great Bhagwati Sen debate made sense
[Guest]: in the 70s and 80s, but it may be distracting us from the fact that regardless of what you
[Guest]: spend on, you're spending so badly, right? I mean, so, your capex is incredibly inefficient,
[Guest]: your social sector spending is also incredibly inefficient, and so, if you focus instead
[Guest]: on kind of improving the quality of the pipes and service delivery and state capacity, that
[Guest]: you can do more of everything, okay? So, that way, there is no conflict, because you're
[Guest]: so far inside this production possibilities curve that when you add the PPF, then there's
[Guest]: a trade-off, right? But when you're so far inside, you can do more of everything, and
[Guest]: therefore, and which is kind of, you know, one of the other things I talk about in the
[Guest]: book is to hopefully kind of find an ideological middle ground that can unify both the left
[Guest]: and the right, right? I mean, around this kind of what we're trying to do. So, I think
[Guest]: Yogendra Yadav has this very nice quote about India where he says, you know, that the left
[Guest]: does not have a viable economics and the right does not have a viable politics, okay? Which
[Guest]: is because the left would like to redistribute more, but we're a poor country and the government
[Guest]: doesn't have the money to redistribute as much as the left would like. The right would
[Guest]: like to kind of do more capex and growth, but that doesn't work with the democratic
[Guest]: constraint, right? That politically, you need to do welfare, right? I mean, and so, that's
[Guest]: the fundamental ideological loggerhead we're caught at, and part of what I'm trying to
[Guest]: do is not just kind of be technocratic about what we can do, but also kind of, you know,
[Guest]: build a broader set of inclusion and kind of identify an agenda that we can all agree
[Guest]: on, right? I mean, so that we kind of move away from the zero-sum nature of our public
[Guest]: discourse to kind of saying, what are the investments that can allow all of us to do
[Guest]: better as a country? So, that's broadly why I'm writing the book, and then most of it
[Amit Varma]: is then about the how. That's wonderful. And you know, what I particularly like is
[Amit Varma]: the core point of what you just said, and correct me if I, you know, in my effort to
[Amit Varma]: be concise, I don't state it so well, but is that, you know, the argument about the
[Amit Varma]: trade-offs between growth and redistribution are moot, because at the bottom of it lies
[Amit Varma]: the problem of state capacity, that the pipelines aren't good. And what you are saying is that,
[Amit Varma]: listen, let's fix the state. If we fix the state, we can do growth, we can do redistribution
[Amit Varma]: as well, we can satisfy all sides of the sort of, really fixing the state is not something
[Amit Varma]: that anyone of any ideology should have any problem with. And aside as a lament that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, when you speak of mission mode versus essential services, one, that is so, so true.
[Amit Varma]: But two, what it also strikes me is that the title of the show is especially sort of valid
[Amit Varma]: here, the seen and the unseen, because it's really a distinction between seen and unseen
[Amit Varma]: missions that COVID-19 comes or a hurricane strikes, that's a seen mission, we can see
[Amit Varma]: the damage. But, you know, there is an unseen mission and unseen disaster, which is a failure
[Amit Varma]: of the Indian state throughout all this time, like in your book, you point out among many
[Amit Varma]: other incredible statistics, that 30% of Indian children today are malnourished, 30%, you
[Amit Varma]: know, and to me, 75 years after, we've become independent and all that is unconscionable,
[Amit Varma]: that is a massive failure. In fact, even earlier, what you said about, you know, where you know,
[Amit Varma]: when you compare our metrics, whatever they are, two countries of a similar GDP per capita,
[Amit Varma]: we are doing as well or better. But my fundamental point there is that our GDP per capita should
[Amit Varma]: have risen much faster. And what we've really had is a long, slow period until maybe, you
[Amit Varma]: know, the middle of the 80s and the 90s, of course, what liberalisation did, and then
[Amit Varma]: you have that shooting up and hundreds of millions coming out of poverty, you know,
[Amit Varma]: which was then the opportunity cost of all the bad policies of the past, hundreds of
[Amit Varma]: millions of people remained in poverty, and therefore, that is something I'd classify
[Amit Varma]: as a humanitarian disaster.
[Guest]: And again, and you know, and to be fair, again, to the founding father and everybody, I mean,
[Guest]: I really think India's, you know, the big lost decade of 15 years was really those Indira
[Amit Varma]: Gandhi years, right? Like, you know, it was really 65 to 80, right? I mean, that was the
[Guest]: truly lost decade. I think most of the decisions that were taken post-independence, I think,
[Guest]: were completely in line with global thinking at that time. So you can't even fault anybody
[Guest]: for those decisions, right? I mean, and if anything, they were vigorously debated, vigorously
[Guest]: talked about. Where we really missed the boat was, you know, was those 15 years, right?
[Guest]: And then I think, I think you've had Pooja Mehra also on the show, right? I mean, and
[Guest]: then, you know, we've had the lost decade, and then you've had the conversations recently
[Guest]: with Montaken and Ajay. And I think the important thing there is to just repeat and reinforce
[Guest]: that we can't take growth for granted, right? I mean, it takes kind of both seeding the
[Guest]: world of ideas and seeding the world of policy with kind of repeating certain basic fundamentals,
[Guest]: right, about how these things matter. But again, you know, I think I'm not, the whole
[Guest]: goal of the book, I mean, in some ways, is to kind of be cautiously optimistic, right?
[Guest]: I mean, by kind of saying that it's very, very easy to get down on kind of the scale
[Guest]: of the problems, right? So, and that's why I end with that David Landis quote. But yes,
[Guest]: I think, you know, the point is well taken that both growth matters, but you, by improving
[Guest]: the functioning of the Indian state at any given level of GDP per capita, you can deliver
[Guest]: much, much better outcomes, right? I mean, and so that's why there's no conflict, if
[Guest]: you can actually improve the functioning of the state.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and I completely agree with you about how our founders pretty much had no choice
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that knowing what they did then, and they hadn't, of course, read your book,
[Amit Varma]: if Nehru and Ambedkar read your book, it could have been different. But knowing what they
[Amit Varma]: knew, then, you know, they made a good faith effort to do the best that they could for
[Guest]: the country. And that is, of course, not true of Indira Gandhi and her.
[Guest]: That would be incredible hubris to think that, you know, they should read my book. In fact,
[Guest]: my sophomore paper in college, when I was taking class in Indian economy was actually
[Guest]: an intellectual history of the policy choices that was made at that time. And, you know,
[Guest]: so this is stuff I actually studied as a sophomore in college. And it was actually really incredible,
[Guest]: not just in terms of the choices that were made, but more importantly, the amount of
[Guest]: debate and discussion there was, it wasn't nearly like, I mean, as monolithic as like,
[Guest]: you know, as it may seem, there was, in fact, a lot of healthy discussion about a lot of
[Guest]: these things. So yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Let's sort of, but before we move on, I, you know, I think of the state through a number
[Amit Varma]: of frameworks, which you would know, because you seem to have heard all my episodes. I
[Amit Varma]: feel like, yeah, you're like a creepy stalker who's, you know, seen all the pictures on
[Amit Varma]: my phone. And, you know, I have nowhere to hide right now. That's how I feel. But, you
[Amit Varma]: know, and so one of the frameworks I look at the state is, of course, Francis Fukuyama's,
[Amit Varma]: you know, framework of scope versus strength. And, you know, a way to sum up India there
[Amit Varma]: is that we do too many things badly, instead of doing a few things really well. And obviously,
[Amit Varma]: being classical liberal as I am, I would want the state to just focus on a few things and
[Amit Varma]: do them really, really well. Instead, we focus on many things and do them really badly. And
[Amit Varma]: perhaps your point is that there isn't so much of a dichotomy. If you just improve state
[Amit Varma]: capacity in all the various ways that you outline in this book, that we could do those
[Amit Varma]: few things well, and then we could do a few other things as well. At least it wouldn't
[Amit Varma]: be a disaster and you know, money down the drain with all the sort of implications of
[Amit Varma]: that. But I want to now sort of talk about your wonderful metaphor of what kind of car,
[Amit Varma]: you know, we are in. So tell me a little bit about that.
[Guest]: Yeah, and you know, I think so maybe given that, you know, you are talking about the
[Guest]: intro chapter having read it, but you can't post it, right? I mean, maybe what I will
[Guest]: do is take maybe 10 minutes to just lay out the broader arc of the book and then, you
[Guest]: know, put that metaphor, you know, put that metaphor in there. And yeah, this is also
[Guest]: partly reassuring your reader, your listeners are holding me accountable over the course
[Guest]: of this time that the book is actually happening. It's there, the ideas are there. It's not
[Guest]: just like one of these. It's like, you know, not one of these things, you will get it one
[Guest]: day. But I think the metaphor, see, the metaphor I use is that just like the ambassador car,
[Guest]: right, was a metaphor for pre-liberalization India, right? I mean, you could think about
[Guest]: a similar metaphor for the Indian state, right? The Indian state itself is like a 1950s car,
[Guest]: okay? Because the 50s is when we made the last set of institutional investments in what
[Guest]: the state was going to be, right? That was part of what the founders did. Now, over the
[Guest]: years, what has happened is you have added more and more and more expectations onto the
[Guest]: state and onto the car without commensurately investing in the capacity of the car to carry
[Guest]: that load, okay? So what politicians are doing is competing in which direction to steer the
[Guest]: car, okay? But the car itself is barely moving, okay? So, hence, you know, Flailing State
[Guest]: kind of analogy also, you know, partly comes from there. But the other reason the car analogy
[Guest]: works so well is that today when you want to move the car in a certain way, you still
[Guest]: put some fuel, right? So additional budgets will make the car move a little bit. But the
[Guest]: translation of the budget into distance travel is very poor because the car is a 1950s car,
[Guest]: right? And then, you know, and so what does a politician who wants to deliver in certain
[Guest]: areas do? You increase the budget and you put the, you know, you put a lot of pressure
[Guest]: on those officers in that department to deliver, saying yeh karna hai. And that's like pressing
[Guest]: the accelerator on a 1950s car, right? So it will sputter, sputter and move along a
[Guest]: little bit, right? But what is needed, and again, to be fair to politicians, right? It's
[Guest]: one set of skills to win an election. It's another set of skills to run the government,
[Guest]: which is already a big skill. And then it's a completely different set of skills to actually
[Guest]: architect the state, right? I mean, which is even different from driving the state,
[Guest]: right? I mean, architecture toh bahut door ki baat hai, right? And so you can't even
[Guest]: blame them, given the time horizons and given, you know, the different incentive structures.
[Guest]: And so because you're trying to both drive the car as fast as you can, you never invest
[Guest]: in the maintenance and in kind of the redesign. And so I think one of the reasons we are at
[Guest]: this place with the returns to investing in state capacity that the data shows is 10 times,
[Guest]: 20 times higher, is because you've under-invested so much. So marginal cost, marginal benefit
[Guest]: if you equate, because you've done so little of that, those returns get very high. So I
[Guest]: think, you know, taking a big picture, this thing about the book itself, right? So it's
[Guest]: 18 chapters, right? So there's this intro chapter that's laying out kind of India's
[Guest]: crisis of state capacity, right? Which is what I've sent you. Now, the core of the book
[Guest]: is technocratic in terms of what we need to do about this. But it is bookended both at
[Guest]: the beginning and the end by a deeper discussion of politics, right? Because in the end, the
[Guest]: incentives have to align, right? And so we've got chapter 2 and 3, which are really about
[Guest]: the building blocks of the Indian state. So chapter 2 is called the politician's predicament
[Guest]: and chapter 3 is called the bureaucracy's burden, right? Which is, you know, so we the
[Guest]: taxpaying class often just have such a derisive kind of attitude towards both the politicians
[Guest]: and the bureaucrats, right? Think politicians at worst are corrupt, at best are taking taxpayer
[Guest]: money to give out freebies and get reelected, right? So that is certainly the trope of politicians.
[Guest]: And then for bureaucrats, the trope is that, you know, generally lazy, officious, risk
[Guest]: averse, whatever. And, you know, I think my point is that both of these are actually really,
[Guest]: really unfair, right? I mean, that once you kind of get into the constraints that these
[Guest]: actors are functioning under, what you realize is that, that there are an incredible number
[Guest]: of good people who are stuck in a really bad system, okay? And so, and that's why the core
[Guest]: point of the book is to take a systems level view of the Indian state to both diagnose
[Guest]: and then hopefully cure, right? So, so, so chapter 2 and 3, then get into kind of, yeah,
[Guest]: so and we can talk a little bit more about that. But the core point of the politician's
[Guest]: predicament is again, that the pressure to deliver welfare, right? I mean, at a low level
[Guest]: of GDP per capita means that the political incentives have always veered towards, you
[Guest]: know, doing things that are visible, right? I mean, again, it's seen and unseen everywhere,
[Guest]: right? I mean, it needs to be visible, it needs to be seen, it needs to be attributable.
[Guest]: And that has sharply limited kind of the investments in the state itself, right? Now, but there's
[Guest]: another subtle point. And this is, again, we could take an entire episode there, which
[Guest]: is that the nature of the constrained state has also affected the nature of our politics,
[Guest]: right? Which is that because voters and politicians rationally know that the state cannot cater
[Guest]: to everybody, the nature of the politics becomes one of how do I grab my share of the state
[Guest]: resources, right? So the entire nature of vote bank politics is then comes from the
[Guest]: fact that I can't deliver to everybody, right? I mean, so it is I deliver to my dedicated
[Guest]: base voters who show up to vote. And that creates another vicious cycle, because the
[Guest]: vicious cycle that creates is that if the political incentives are to direct the resources
[Guest]: of the state towards preferred groups, then you don't want a competent and independent
[Guest]: bureaucracy, you want a pliable bureaucracy, right? Like you mean that will do your bidding.
[Guest]: So over the years, we have emasculated the bureaucracy, right? I mean, both in terms
[Guest]: of its independence and competence, and also structurally by under investing in different
[Guest]: aspects, whether it's staffing, whether it's training, whether it's performance measurement,
[Guest]: whether it's data. So we've under invested in bureaucratic effectiveness across the board.
[Guest]: And so then you're now in this kind of place. And the case for optimism, what I argue is,
[Guest]: the case for optimism is that the nature of politics I genuinely think is changing, okay,
[Guest]: in India, where the so there's the old politics of vote bank politics, which is cleavages
[Guest]: of various kinds, right? I mean, caste, religion, religion, language, whatever, there's the
[Guest]: cleavage based old politics. And there is a newer politics of governance and service
[Guest]: delivery, right? I mean, and essentially, my contention is that I'm not saying that
[Guest]: the old politics is over, but that the old politics is no longer enough, right? I mean,
[Guest]: that you need to kind of at least have so that can be a base of your votes, but you
[Guest]: need to also show that you're able to deliver. Okay. So the good news is that the political
[Guest]: incentives are changing. And this is partly a result of education, partly a result of
[Guest]: technology, partly a result of, you know, a bunch of things we can talk about. But I'm
[Guest]: less interested in why the change is happening and the consequences of the change and the
[Guest]: opportunity it gives us. Okay. So, but the challenge today is that there are so many
[Guest]: political leaders I've talked to who are incredibly frustrated by their own bureaucracies, right?
[Guest]: I mean, inability to deliver. And, but it's unfair to blame this bureaucracy because you've
[Guest]: under invested them in 30 years. Okay. So you're now at this place where there are politicians
[Guest]: who really want to deliver. Okay. And I've had now multiple conversations in the context
[Guest]: of CJIS, which I'll come back to, that the demand from the political class about ways
[Guest]: of improving governance is actually remarkably large. Okay. The problem is that, you know,
[Guest]: the bureaucracy has been so under invested in, like it means that that's not able to
[Guest]: deliver. Now, it's not like it can't deliver. The way you deliver it is you find your best
[Guest]: officers, you put them in the few departments that matter to you, and then you try to drive
[Guest]: good stuff in those departments. But, you know, there's a shortage of good officers.
[Guest]: There's a shortage of good people. And I remember working in a state where there was a chief
[Guest]: minister who actually was pretty reformist, but there was a department that had gotten
[Guest]: a secretary who wasn't very good. And I remember talking to the secretary to chief minister
[Guest]: saying, like, you know, how do we make progress? He said, listen, you know, I, I, I have only
[Guest]: a few good people, okay, like, and there's only so much I can do. So I think that there
[Guest]: is a genuine opportunity that politically, I think there's a desire to do this. And therefore,
[Guest]: I think the state capacity agenda has a politically feasible window of kind of happening. But
[Guest]: that only gives you kind of the political opportunity. And again, going back to the
[Guest]: 91 reforms, it's not enough to have a crisis to say that, like, you know, we'll do good
[Guest]: things, you need an intellectual blueprint of what are we going to do, right? I mean,
[Guest]: and so the hope here is that there is the like, in any policy situation, right? Luck
[Guest]: is when preparation meets opportunity, okay, so you need both. And if the opportunity shows
[Guest]: up, but you haven't prepared, then you don't quite know how to, you know, do stuff. Conversely,
[Guest]: you can do all the prep, but you know, there's no opportunity. So my hope is that we are
[Guest]: at an inflection point as a country where there is political demand to kind of deliver
[Guest]: better governance. But that's going to require actually strengthening the state, which then
[Guest]: is, like I said, is a job of re architecting the state. So it's not just a question of
[Guest]: increasing budgets. It's then a question of really getting into the innards of the dysfunction
[Guest]: and saying, what constitutes effective state capacity? And how do we build that? So then
[Guest]: that is then the next six chapters of the book, right, which is the conceptual core
[Guest]: of the book, which is saying, you know, what are the building blocks of effective states,
[Guest]: right? And those six chapters are, we start with data and measurement. So it's again,
[Guest]: wonderful, you've had more. So in a way, I feel like this thing is an ode to all of your
[Guest]: episodes over the years, like, you know, I mean, and your constant rants about saying
[Guest]: that we are dealing with a dysfunctional state. So you know, I feel like in my, yeah, so you
[Guest]: are like this voice in my head over the years, like, you know, but we start with data and
[Guest]: outcome measurement. And you know, you've had episodes with Pramit and Rukmini on that,
[Guest]: right? I think something you've not had an episode on, which is a much more complex subject,
[Guest]: right, is actually public sector personnel management, right? I mean, the innards of
[Guest]: the personnel economics of the state, right? And so, and that's chapter five, right, about
[Guest]: how we are kind of messing up everything from recruitment, to training, to posting, to performance
[Guest]: measurement, promotions, every aspect of public sector, human resource management, right,
[Guest]: I mean, is kind of dysfunctional is too strong a word, but is really at rock bottom. Okay,
[Guest]: so one simple way of saying this is that the Department of Personnel and Training, which
[Guest]: is supposed to do all of this stuff, is informally known as Department of Postings and Transfers,
[Guest]: right? Because the only thing that they focus on is how are you transferring people as opposed
[Guest]: to kind of the deeper aspects of building an effective kind of human resource base and
[Guest]: strategy for the state, right? So, so people really are the sinews of the state. And that's
[Guest]: chapter five, okay. And then chapter six is on public finance and expenditure. Because
[Guest]: again, what is what is the state? What is the government? It is trying to express some
[Guest]: notion of the collective good through taxation and spending, right? And so, effective states
[Guest]: spend their money effectively. And part of that chapter is just documenting how incredibly
[Guest]: badly we spend our public money, right? I mean, and so, again, it's not like we have
[Guest]: no accountability. But the accountability is very much on process and compliance and
[Guest]: not outcomes. Okay, so, so it's not like we don't have a CAG that we have other measures
[Guest]: of accountability. But, and there's this wonderful example, you know, which again, the references
[Guest]: to pop culture are quite nice here, right? So, when in the I don't know if I talked about
[Guest]: this in education, okay, but think about education technology. Okay, so we think that technology
[Guest]: can be transformative. And but what does national ed tech policy look like? It looks like what
[Guest]: is the budget for computer labs? How many computers am I going to procure? And how many
[Guest]: labs I'm going to build? But then when I go to the schools, you'll see that in the majority
[Guest]: of these labs, the labs are locked, and the chavi is sitting with the principal, okay?
[Guest]: Now, what why is that? Because his incentives are not about is the computer being used,
[Guest]: it is it should not get stolen, right? Agar chori ho jaye toh, like, I mean, I'm in deep
[Guest]: trouble, right? And again, you can see all of this in pop culture. So, in the show panchayat,
[Guest]: which I love, right, there's this entire episode called computer nahi monitor, right? Computer
[Guest]: chori ho gayi, monitor chori ho gayi toh the guy was in deep trouble. Whereas, even if
[Guest]: the computer had never been used, nobody was going to ask him any questions, right? So,
[Guest]: it's not we don't have accountability, but the accountability is completely on compliance,
[Guest]: right? I mean, as opposed to outcomes. And then there's many, many other aspects of kind
[Guest]: of the architecture of public expenditure that is, you know, dysfunctional is too strong
[Guest]: a word, but really, really rock bottom, okay, in terms of both how we allocate the money
[Guest]: and how we spend the money, right? So, then that's that chapter. Then there's this seventh
[Guest]: chapter is revenue, which is again, the core of the state, the issue here is not just in
[Guest]: terms of quantity of revenue, but also the quality of revenue, which is something Ajay
[Guest]: and Vijay talk about, like, you know, they almost sound like Amitabh Bachchan twins in
[Guest]: some movie.
[Guest]: Ajay and Vijay?
[Guest]: Yeah, Kilkar Shah is fine, but Ajay Vijay sounds like, you know, okay, this is Amitabh
[Guest]: and his twin, like, you know, in some movie. But anyway, so I think, you know, they talk
[Guest]: about the marginal cost of public funds, right? I mean, and then I do a deeper dive into kind
[Guest]: of the landscape of revenue instruments and how the, you know, we there is actually a
[Guest]: lot of low hanging fruit, if we start thinking also about the quality of revenue. And I'll
[Guest]: talk about this in the federalism chapter as well. Then the eighth chapter is federalism,
[Guest]: which is ostensibly what we're talking about today, okay, which is, you know, reflecting
[Guest]: on the fact that India has one fifth of humanity, right? We have more people in India than all
[Guest]: of Africa, right? I mean, which is 54 countries, we have more people in India than the entire
[Guest]: Western Hemisphere put together, North America, Central America, South America put together,
[Guest]: we have about 50% more people than all of that, right? So how do you possibly govern
[Guest]: like in such a large country without effective kind of decentralization? And just one stunning
[Guest]: fact here is that, see, people think about China as being very, very strong and centralized
[Guest]: and Xi Jinping controlled everything. But while it's true that the party is omnipresent,
[Guest]: if you look at one key measure of decentralization, which is at what level of government are your
[Guest]: budget spent? And at what level of government are your staff allocated? In China, over 50%,
[Guest]: 50% of public expenditure happens at the local government level. In India, that is 3%. Okay,
[Guest]: so China is 17 times more decentralized than India when it comes to kind of local expenditure.
[Guest]: Okay, so and we'll dive a lot more into that when we talk about federalism, but really
[Guest]: kind of understanding federalism and understanding the optimal architecture of functions and
[Guest]: funds and functionaries at different levels of the government is again a cross-cutting
[Guest]: theme that affects all. So what's sitting in the themes part of the book are cross-cutting
[Guest]: that apply across all sectors, right? And then there's chapter 9 on state and the market,
[Guest]: right? Which is given that the market accounts for 70% of healthcare, 50% of education, like
[Guest]: you know, in security, the private sector employs five times more than all of the public
[Guest]: government put together. How should we kind of optimize the interface of the state and
[Guest]: the market? And again, we talked a little bit about this in the education episode, and
[Guest]: you can see the cross-connections, right? How so many of these themes will then show
[Guest]: up in the sectors. But I think one very useful high-level way of thinking about the state
[Guest]: and market chapter is that the government plays three very distinct roles in the ecosystem.
[Guest]: You are a policymaker, you are a regulator, and you are a provider. And the way you think
[Guest]: about the private sector needs to be very different in those three roles. So as a policymaker,
[Guest]: the private sector is your ally because you care about delivering outcomes regardless
[Guest]: of whether it's delivered by public or private. As a regulator, the private is your equal.
[Guest]: As a provider, the private is your competition. Now the problem is 95% of government budgets
[Guest]: and staff are allocated to government as provider, which means intrinsically in the DNA of the
[Guest]: government is a deep distrust of the private sector. That's because of where the government's
[Guest]: kind of own staffing and resources and mindset are, right? So having some conceptual clarity
[Guest]: there about  and again, this is not just to say blindly privatize. There are huge challenges,
[Guest]: right? But that's a chapter that tries to provide conceptual clarity about how to optimize
[Guest]: the role of the private sector to deliver outcomes in the public interest. And this
[Guest]: is where some people were like, there's enough for a book right here, right? I mean,
[Guest]: why don't you stop here at nine chapters? But the second half of the book is then recognizing
[Guest]: that listen, these concepts are still very abstract. And in the end, for a government
[Guest]: to take action on it, for people to get galvanized around it, governments are organized around
[Guest]: sectors, around departments, right? So you need to then take these ideas and say, okay,
[Guest]: where do we want to kind of deploy this? And there's actually a very subtle and interesting
[Guest]: kind of aside, right? And which we can talk a little bit about, which is even though I
[Guest]: believe that the state capacity agenda is something that the left and the right and
[Guest]: everybody should coalesce around, there is a notable group of skeptics who think that
[Guest]: if you have a malevolent state, then a weak state is actually better. Okay, and I think
[Guest]: Naushad discussed this in an episode with you when he talked about Germany, Italy and
[Guest]: Spain, right? Like you've seen that under World War Two, under fascist governments,
[Guest]: the one with the highest capacity actually did the worst outcome. So if you believe the
[Guest]: state is malevolent, like I mean, people may actually want to kind of have a weak state.
[Guest]: But I think that's very, very, very short sighted, right? Because if you were to integrate
[Guest]: over 200 years of say, you know, Germany versus Greece, you would much rather be Germany than
[Guest]: Greece, okay, in terms of what a well functioning state has delivered for its people. Okay,
[Guest]: so what you want is to build an effective state, but also then build safeguards and
[Guest]: systems that that capacity is used to serve people rather than rule them. Okay, so but
[Guest]: that's again, a chicken and egg. It's a chicken and egg. And I talk about this specifically
[Guest]: in the context of say, cops and police, right, which is, you know, at one level, you got
[Guest]: incredible kind of problems of police violence overuse and encounter killings are probably
[Guest]: the most extreme version of that. Okay, but, but the fact is, in practice, the senior officers
[Guest]: will say they don't like it, but they have to condone it because the alternative is that
[Guest]: you're in court for 25 years and no action is taken. And so even the extrajudicial aspects
[Guest]: of kind of how our police function reflect the weak state capacity that you don't have
[Guest]: the resources for the investigations, you don't have the resources for, you know, the
[Guest]: judicial system to deal with this in a rule of law way. Okay, so it is one thing to have
[Guest]: the aspirations of a modern democratic state in the Constitution. But if you haven't invested
[Guest]: in the capacity of the state to meet those aspirations, then again, it's relatively hard.
[Guest]: So a lot of the disquiet that we feel about India comes not, I think, from a lot of people
[Guest]: who think this is lack of intention. My own view is that in most of the case, it's not
[Guest]: intention, but it's lack of capacity, right? So anyway, so I think, but the reason I'm
[Guest]: giving you that aside is then that the second half of the book is then saying, if these
[Guest]: are the ways you improve the effectiveness of the state by kind of, you know, and each
[Guest]: of these, it's not just saying improve data, right? Each chapter has very, very concrete
[Guest]: ideas. So then that's kind of the worm's eye part of this, right? Which is saying, there
[Guest]: are six things that you can actually do under each of these things that are now possible
[Guest]: that we just kind of need to get our act together and get it done, right? So each of those chapters
[Guest]: has very concrete ideas. And then there's this transition chapter, chapter 10, which
[Guest]: is accelerating India's development, right? I mean, where I talk about all of these cross-country,
[Guest]: cross-state comparisons by income, and then making the case that, listen, both the growth
[Guest]: wallahs, see, if you listen to the growth wallahs, they'll say, let's go from six to
[Guest]: eight percent, and then everything will be great, okay? But part of my point is, if you
[Guest]: look at how growth has translated into better outcomes in the past 20 years and extrapolate
[Guest]: that, that even going to eight percent growth is not going to get you to a good enough place
[Guest]: in India at 2047, okay? The rate at which the income is translating into outcomes is
[Guest]: unacceptably slow. Conversely, the development wallahs will say, increase the budgets, okay?
[Guest]: Like give me an hour of health education, whatever. And I show that even if you do that,
[Guest]: you're not going to do that much better. Whereas if you improve the effectiveness of the state
[Guest]: and in the translation of the income into the outcomes, that's what's going to allow
[Guest]: you to accelerate India's development across all of these parameters, right? I mean, so
[Guest]: yes, you want the growth, but you also want to go to the north of that, okay? So that's
[Guest]: that transition chapter. And then the policy core of the book is then six chapters, six
[Guest]: sector chapters, right? Which is education and skills, health and nutrition, police and
[Guest]: public safety, courts and justice, social protection and welfare, and jobs, productivity
[Guest]: and economic growth, okay? And why these six sectors is basically it's because, going back
[Guest]: to the Amartya Sen and Bhagwati discussion, right? It's that what is nice about these
[Guest]: six sectors is they are both intrinsically important to kind of human welfare and instrumentally
[Guest]: important for aggregate economic growth, okay? So like I said in the last episode, we were
[Guest]: talking about health and education. See, the Chicago view of human capital is that you
[Guest]: get educated because it makes you more productive. You get healthier because it makes you more
[Guest]: productive, okay? But the intrinsic view of this is independent of my productivity being
[Guest]: more educated gives me a more empowered life. Being healthier gives me a better quality
[Guest]: life, right? And so each of these six sectors ticks both of those boxes, that better education
[Guest]: gives you a more meaningful individual life and accelerates economic growth. Better health,
[Guest]: nutrition, environment is going to help both individuals and aggregate productivity. Police
[Guest]: and public safety, I think basic safety is the most essential component of a good life.
[Guest]: But then the better safety is also going to have massive productivity implications, right?
[Guest]: So whether it's kind of security, property rights and investment, or just improving female
[Guest]: labour force participation. So you've talked many times about gender issues and safety
[Guest]: is a huge tax and a huge constraint that constrains our ability to not just provide safety intrinsically,
[Guest]: but to increase instrumental goals like labour force participation, okay?
[Guest]: Same with courts and justice, right? So obviously there's the human rights tragedy of two-thirds
[Guest]: of our incarcerated population not even having been found guilty. So that's at an intrinsic
[Guest]: level that this is a moral failing. But instrumentally, there's this paper by Manaswini Rao, who got
[Guest]: a PhD at Berkeley and is now at UCSD as a postdoc, and she's got this lovely paper looking
[Guest]: at district judge vacancies, right? And showing that every extra district judge that's appointed
[Guest]: clears about 200 cases a year. But more importantly, because 70% of the cases that are handled
[Guest]: in district courts are either land or credit, okay? So these are factors of production that
[Guest]: are being locked from productive use because they're under dispute, right? So therefore
[Guest]: unlocking those factors of production actually leads to a significant increase in total economic
[Guest]: activity and the estimate is that the increased tax revenue from that activity will more than
[Guest]: pay for this, so you get a return of infinite if you make those investments, okay? So that's
[Guest]: then an example of why kind of strengthening courts and justice is both intrinsically and
[Guest]: instrumentally important, right? And then there's, you know, Chapter 15 on social protection
[Guest]: and welfare, where again, you know, I think our public discourse has, I think, a very
[Guest]: coarse dichotomy of freebies versus investment, right? And again, I argue that that's a little
[Guest]: misguided, that what you really want to think about is on the axis of equity and efficiency,
[Guest]: and you'll see that there are some welfare programs that are bad for both, like, say,
[Guest]: free electricity for farmers, and there are some that are good for both, okay? So it's
[Guest]: not this kind of broad brush, welfare is bad or welfare is good, that the details really,
[Guest]: really matter, okay? And this is where it's not just about intrinsic welfare, that it's
[Guest]: good for people to be protected from the vagaries of the market, but it's also instrumentally
[Guest]: good for the economy. Why is that? Because how does growth happen, right? Growth happens
[Guest]: from the process of individuals undertaking investments that are going to give you positive
[Guest]: returns, but any investment is risky, okay? And so, if you look at all the studies of,
[Guest]: say, agriculture crop diversification, the first time you grow a new crop, you will lose
[Guest]: money because you're learning, okay? And so, having a well-functioning social protection
[Guest]: system actually gives you the cushion to undertake the risk that gets you to a higher growth
[Guest]: path at every individual level. So again, the question is architecting it and getting
[Guest]: into the details, the details really, really, really matter, okay? It is kind of one of
[Guest]: the messages that comes out of that chapter. And then finally, the jobs, productivity and
[Guest]: economic growth, and that goes without saying, it's the most important intrinsic source of
[Guest]: both empowerment and income, but also sense of kind of meaningful contribution is a job,
[Guest]: and then that's obviously about economic growth, right? So then those six chapters therefore
[Guest]: become kind of the policy core of the book, right? Which is how do you, but it's not,
[Guest]: so in a way, I'm having both, right? You said, why didn't I write a book on education? So
[Guest]: this is my way of trying to do both, right? I mean, there's both the sectoral piece and
[Guest]: the thematic piece. And then the last two chapters are then going back to kind of the
[Guest]: politics and the institutions, and it's kind of on making it happen. So chapter 17 is about
[Guest]: reimagining institutions, which is to say, it's not enough to just have a bunch of these
[Guest]: ideas for re-architecting the Indian state, you want to institutionalise them in a way
[Guest]: that it becomes daily practice without people even having to think about it, right? So going
[Guest]: back to say, Atul Gawande, Checklist Manifesto, et cetera, there's cognitive constraints and
[Guest]: you can't have to think about this, think about it. It just needs to become automatic
[Guest]: in terms of how you function. So then, and again, so one thing I've not talked about
[Guest]: so far, which we'll talk about maybe in federalism, is that a key part of this entire book is
[Guest]: focusing on ideas that can be done at the state level. So the early draft of the book
[Guest]: had this working title of Fixing the Indian State, a Roadmap for Chief Ministers. That
[Guest]: title is going to change, but one of the key points is I'm focusing at the state level.
[Guest]: And we'll talk more about that in the federalism chapter. But even on the institutions chapter,
[Guest]: part of my point is that we have so far relied purely on the government of India to make
[Guest]: institutional investments for the country. But there's no reason why states cannot take
[Guest]: the lead in reimagining some institutions, right? And then chapter 18 is about state
[Guest]: citizen and civil society, which is then, you know, agar yeh karna hai, to how do we
[Guest]: all kind of play a role, right? I'm here trying to make this happen. So anyway, like, you
[Guest]: know, now I feel like I'm done. We don't need a book episode. But that is just kind of the
[Amit Varma]: outline of one section in chapter one. No, I mean, the first of all, this is such a lovely
[Amit Varma]: summary of the book. And it's very apt that this episode is releasing on Independence
[Amit Varma]: Day, because it's almost like you're taking stock from this bird's eye view of the entire
[Amit Varma]: Indian state. So there are like 13,814 things I want to double click on. But first and aside,
[Amit Varma]: that you know, if I was forming a libertarian heavy metal band, many of my album titles
[Amit Varma]: would have come from phrases you just used, for example, innards of the dysfunction, sinews
[Amit Varma]: of the state, return of infinite. These are just remarkable titles. So you know, if you
[Amit Varma]: get past Antakshari into something maybe a little heavier, you know, there is a future
[Amit Varma]: for you, I'd love to see the kind of lyrics that you come up with. Now, you know, from
[Amit Varma]: this bird's eye view, I'm not going to dive in directly into some worm's eye view or the
[Amit Varma]: other because that would be a little disorienting perhaps, but it's almost like a bird's
[Amit Varma]: eye is flying and it's got the bird's eye view. And then it notices in the distance
[Amit Varma]: what appears to be a large colony of worms, and its gaze kind of, you know, focuses on
[Amit Varma]: to that. And that's the kind of view I'm going to take in the sense that, you know, all of
[Amit Varma]: us use state capacity in just this very general kind of way. It's become one of those phrases
[Amit Varma]: like people will use liberal or people will use freedom and people will use so many words
[Amit Varma]: which have become so nebulous through overuse and because they mean so much, but you've
[Amit Varma]: got a really nice section where you kind of begin with sort of defining that, what does
[Amit Varma]: one mean by state capacity? And then what are the factors of state capacity? So, you
[Amit Varma]: know, so take us a bit through that, because I feel when we start discussing state capacity,
[Amit Varma]: it's important to at least agree on the definition first. And your explanation was so lucid that
[Amit Varma]: I will ask you to, you know, for my benefit and my listeners benefit, just go through
[Amit Varma]: that again, that what are the different ways in which we can define it? And what are the
[Amit Varma]: various factors that, you know, go into state capacity? And from there, we can go on to
[Amit Varma]: talk about, okay, where are our failures? Why are we weak? And so on?
[Guest]: Yeah, and I think, you know, so this is, yeah, this is just section two of that intro chapter,
[Guest]: right? I'm kind of defining these key things. Now, I think the academic literature has,
[Guest]: you know, there are different ways of thinking about state capacity. Some measures are just
[Guest]: your ability to protect your borders, your ability to enforce the writ of the law, right?
[Guest]: And within your borders, collecting revenue is an important measure. There are meta definitions
[Guest]: of state capacity, which has to do with your institutions of negotiating disagreement and
[Guest]: conflict, right? So, you know, even having effective political institutions is a measure
[Guest]: of state capacity, right? Because the breakdown of law and order often reflects, you know,
[Guest]: essentially a failure of a political process, okay, to say that there is in fact, a win
[Guest]: win equilibrium that we could move to, right, if we got away from this conflict. So, there
[Guest]: are meta definitions of state capacity, which is can you even strike this political bargain
[Guest]: that people co-exist without, you know, being at each other's throats all the time. And
[Guest]: then I think, you know, there is, from my perspective, I'm focusing on state capacity
[Guest]: fundamentally in its executive sense, correct, which is the ability of a state to implement
[Guest]: its own policies and programs and to kind of perform its core functions, right? So,
[Guest]: the core functions of a state, whether it's law and order, whether it's justice. Now,
[Guest]: health and education, you might argue, are not core definitional functions of a state,
[Guest]: but a modern democratic state expects that the state is going to do health and education
[Guest]: a certain amount of welfare, right? I mean, so, I'm defining state capacity in the book
[Guest]: fundamentally as, like I said, about the car itself, right? So, I'm not in the business
[Guest]: of directing the car, okay? That is something that comes from the political process. But
[Guest]: this is about how do you re-architect and engineer the car so that it can deliver better
[Guest]: for whatever the political process kind of says that the state should do, okay? So, then
[Guest]: these six specifics, which I then talk about what determines state effectiveness, right,
[Guest]: are then getting into the innards of state capacity. And those are then the six chapters,
[Guest]: which I've talked about. But I can say a little bit more, which is kind of, you know, on data
[Guest]: and outcome measurement, right? So, the truth is that we did have one of the best statistical
[Guest]: systems in the world, right? I mean, so, Pramit's been writing a series on this, which has been
[Guest]: very nice. But yes, whether it was Mahalanobis, whether it was others, you know, India was
[Guest]: the envy of the world in terms of the statistical systems we set up. But as with other areas
[Guest]: of the state, we have just not invested in this, right? So, today, we are so far behind
[Guest]: kind of the frontiers of what is possible. And, you know, it's easy to blame this on
[Guest]: politics, but I think politics is actually a relatively small part of it. A bigger part
[Guest]: of it is just the institutional kind of underinvestment, right, I've seen over the years. So, whether
[Guest]: it's new technology for data collection, whether it's, you know, anyway, so there's a data
[Guest]: and outcome measurement kind of chapter, which is, and there's a chief secretary who once
[Guest]: told me, you know, is that our systems are built on a house of cards, because I went
[Guest]: and presented evidence of how much fudging there is in the official data, you know, so
[Guest]: I have that one. And again, it connects back to the education episode, right? With that
[Guest]: wonderful quote of, aapko asliyat se itni lagaav kyu hai, right? And so, you see this
[Guest]: in the official data, there is no learning crisis at all. Okay, and then you go do this
[Guest]: independent audit, you just see that the true levels of learning are way lower than what's
[Guest]: in the official data. Even in a high functioning state like Tamil Nadu, the rate of malnutrition
[Guest]: reported in the official ICDS data, severe malnutrition was about 1%, whereas in the
[Guest]: data, it's about 8%, right? So it's an under, you're understating by a factor of 8. So,
[Guest]: and people know this, right? So, and there's another senior government advisor who said,
[Guest]: you know, we're basically flying blind here. Okay, so, and so there are, and again, this
[Guest]: goes back to my point that there are incredibly thoughtful, well meaning, public spirited
[Guest]: outstanding officials within the system, but none of them individually has the capacity
[Guest]: to kind of fix systemic issues, right? I mean, and so part of what this is, there's nothing
[Guest]: here that we, so one of the reality checks on the book is I've had multiple IAS officer
[Guest]: friends of mine read to just make sure that I'm characterizing things correctly. And what
[Guest]: this is, that yes, some humko intuitively pata hai, but aapne frameworks mein itna accha
[Guest]: sa samjhaya hai, ke this is, you know, this is correct, right? So, but the data and the
[Guest]: outcome measurement is the first kind of foundation. The second is, you know, then just aspects
[Guest]: of public sector personnel management, right? So we think about the state as bloated. But
[Guest]: the truth is, India has actually the fewest number of public employees per capita relative
[Guest]: to any major competitor country, right? So it's five times less even than the US. And
[Guest]: that's because, you know, and 10 times less than Scandinavia. Okay, so there is a massive
[Guest]: problem in terms of just staffing strength. But there's also a problem of accountability.
[Guest]: So you can't just say, I will hire more people. Okay, so the personnel challenge of the Indian
[Guest]: state is a bit like there's this famous quote of two people in a restaurant going and looking
[Guest]: at the food. And the first guy says the food is the food is miserable. And the second one
[Guest]: says yes, and the portions are too small. Okay. But the point is that that's a bit like
[Guest]: the nature of the Indian state, right? It is both too small and too inefficient. So
[Guest]: you can't just expand it in its current form. You need to both re-architect and expand,
[Guest]: right? So you need both of those pieces coming together. Okay, so that's personnel. And then
[Guest]: yeah, we've got these other pieces I've talked about, you know, expenditure, revenue, federalism,
[Guest]: state and market. Yeah, so those are then, I mean, there may be other pieces, but these
[Guest]: are, I think, six pillars that cross cut across every sector. And that's kind of why I focused
[Guest]: on that.
[Amit Varma]: Brilliant. And, you know, just to kind of sum it up for my readers, you speak about
[Amit Varma]: how, you know, data, personnel, public expenditure, collecting revenue efficiently, coordinating
[Amit Varma]: across multiple layers of a federal governance structure. There's a heavy metal title in
[Amit Varma]: there somewhere. And, you know, and working with non-state actors like the private sector
[Amit Varma]: and civil society, all of these are sort of constituents of, you know, how you would,
[Amit Varma]: you know, look at state capacity. Now, you know, another frame that I found really interesting
[Amit Varma]: as a narrative frame, you know, when we talk about why the Indian state is so weak, you
[Amit Varma]: know, we talk about politics, and earlier you were talking about the incentives of politicians.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, a long time back, I, you know, spoke about the interplay between money and power,
[Amit Varma]: and I wrote this limerick, which is called politics. And so politics, a neta who loves
[Amit Varma]: currency notes, told me what his line of work denotes. It is kind of funny, we steal people's
[Amit Varma]: money and use some of it to buy their votes. And so, you know, that kind of indicates where
[Amit Varma]: I'm coming from. But what you have explained so well, is you've explained it in terms of
[Amit Varma]: incentives and how that changed the system. And you've explained it really with this narrative
[Amit Varma]: of nation building to election winning, right, which is sort of useful to see the transition.
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense, it is a transition that really happens between Nehru and Indira Gandhi, in
[Amit Varma]: a sense. So tell me a little bit about that, and how that how therefore politicians incentives
[Amit Varma]: get shaped into that particular thing and that particular, you know, through that particular
[Guest]: phase of time.
[Guest]: Yes, and I think the so, like I said, right, these investments in kind of, the last time
[Guest]: we made systematic investments in the state in the capacity were in the 1950s, when there
[Guest]: was clearly a nation building mode, right, post-independence, you've got a very broad
[Guest]: coalition that represents kind of, you know, and then people talk about the Congress, you
[Guest]: know, pre-Indira Congress is a very different beast from post-Indira Congress, right. So,
[Guest]: you know, pre-Indira Congress, this truly is kind of a broad tent, that's the party
[Guest]: of independence and has kind of the legitimacy, right, to pursue, because essentially, they're
[Guest]: practically guaranteed to win elections, right, I mean, the towering figure of Nehru, the
[Guest]: broad kind of quality of the cabinet. So it's a time when you're truly able to make these
[Guest]: investments, correct. And then what happens, of course, is that as the that legitimacy
[Guest]: of the broad tent of the Congress starts kind of, you know, breaking apart, right, you know,
[Guest]: whether it's the left and the right or whether it's regions, you know, then the nature of
[Guest]: politics very naturally starts becoming kind of more about identifying your base voters,
[Guest]: right. I mean, and this is where it doesn't help that the sheer amount of underlying diversity
[Guest]: and heterogeneity in India means that it is easy to construct kind of narrower group-based
[Guest]: identities and kind of mobilize political activity around that, right. I mean, and so
[Guest]: then you get in, and again, I think Rahul, I think Rahul Verma talked about, you know,
[Guest]: the four phases of kind of Indian politics, democracy. So there's nothing new I'm saying
[Guest]: in any of this stuff, right. I think political scientists have analyzed a lot of this with
[Guest]: regard to kind of the nature of the democracy. What I have not seen as much in the political
[Guest]: science literature is kind of the downstream consequences of the nature of the politics
[Guest]: for the nature of kind of the economics in the state, right. So again, it happens, there
[Guest]: is discussion often about the implications for economic policy. What I've not seen enough
[Guest]: is kind of the implications for the state itself, I think. So the closest, so Pratap's
[Guest]: classic on burden of democracy in 2003, I think, has some kind of elements of this.
[Guest]: Pranab Baradhan, like, you know, who is a very famous development economist, but probably
[Guest]: in development economics was the one who used to think about these political issues the
[Guest]: most, right. He wrote about this even in the 80s, okay, when he talked about how the fragmented
[Guest]: nature of Indian politics just made it really, really hard to build the political consensus
[Guest]: for investing in broad purpose public goods, okay. So, and one of the things I talk about
[Guest]: in chapter two, and now I'm tempted, you know, I, yeah, you can see why I didn't send you
[Guest]: the chapters, but even without that, I'm talking about it, right. But see, here is some basic
[Guest]: electoral math, okay, which I think is very, very powerful, okay. So what has happened
[Guest]: is that in the combination of first past the post, and so, you have first past the post,
[Guest]: you have many, many, many parties fighting every election, and you have turnouts of about
[Guest]: 60%. Okay, so what that means is, it is often enough to have 20 to 25% of the electorate
[Guest]: to actually win an election, okay. Now, but it has dramatic implications for political
[Guest]: incentives. So just imagine the following hypothetical, okay, that you are a politician,
[Guest]: you have $100 of $1,000 of tax money, you have 100 voters, okay. Now, I can, you can
[Guest]: invest this in a public good, right, let's call it state capacity that benefits everybody.
[Guest]: Okay, so the return on investment is, say, 20%. So the 1,000 becomes 1,200. So everybody
[Guest]: gets 12. Okay, so that's kind of model number one. Model number two, is you can say that
[Guest]: instead of investing 1,000 in a public good, I am going to redistribute this to 25 voters
[Guest]: as opposed to 100. And I'm going to give all of them 36, there will be 10 that goes away
[Guest]: as administrative cost, other leakage, it might be even worse, okay. But in this model,
[Guest]: 25 voters get 36, the other 75 get zero. Okay, now, in a simple median voter theorem, this
[Guest]: breaks down because your median voter will prefer the alternative that everybody gets
[Guest]: 12. Okay. But in a model where you are also mobilizing the vote, and only 40% are showing
[Guest]: up, and you have this fracturing, the concentrated vote support base of those 25 voters is more
[Guest]: important to win the election than the diffuse support across the 100. Okay, so and that
[Guest]: gives you then very, very strong incentives to kind of focus on your base voters, right.
[Guest]: So then we get into this kind of broad era of vote bank politics, right, which is each
[Guest]: party is associated with a particular group. And then the nature of the politics becomes
[Guest]: that am I delivering the benefits of the state to that group? Okay, now, it's not as stark
[Guest]: as the example I brought out, but you can then see why the incentives of the political
[Guest]: class are not about broad based state capacity. In fact, there's a very nice recent paper
[Guest]: by Dilip Mukherjee and Pranab, I think Pranab was also on this. They've done a lot of work
[Guest]: on decentralized governance in Bengal. And when they actually do this very nice study
[Guest]: on kind of the electoral returns to patronage politics versus kind of programmatic politics,
[Guest]: right, where patronage and clientelism is the returns to directing the resources of
[Guest]: the state to specific voters. And programmatic politics is when you're doing this in a broader
[Guest]: way. And they seem to suggest that electorally, that the patronage politics does pay off,
[Guest]: okay. And that's partly because the other way to say this is agar aap sabko deliver
[Guest]: kar rahe hai, toh what's in it for me, right? So people want that differentiated attention.
[Guest]: So anyway, it's a, this is the problem of kind of jumping to other chapters, right?
[Guest]: But there are detailed examples that quantify the nature of this challenge that then show
[Guest]: that from nation building to election winning, you then enter this era, right, where the
[Guest]: entire nature of politics is about clientelism, vote bank politics, as opposed to how do we
[Guest]: build public goods that improve the common welfare, right? So, the social welfare in
[Guest]: that first option is way higher, because 1200 is greater than 900. But that benefit is diffused
[Guest]: more, right? So again, classic Mansoor Olson concentrate cars diffuse benefits, same idea,
[Guest]: right, that applies to this kind of political incentives. And so that's kind of, again,
[Guest]: partly why we are in this low level equilibrium. And then there's a bunch of stories. But then
[Guest]: the reason for optimism is to say, like I said, that, and you're seeing this in the
[Guest]: election data, you're seeing this in the exit polls, you're seeing this in actual results,
[Guest]: is that some elements of delivery and performance increasingly do seem to matter, okay. So I
[Guest]: think both Arvind Subramanian and Arvind Panagriya have done different kinds of analysis on state
[Guest]: level elections. And I think pre 2004, there was not much correlation between state economic
[Guest]: growth and the probability being reelected. But after that, I think that that does seem
[Guest]: to matter. And there are other measures that you know, that try to show this. So anyway,
[Guest]: so I think the the point about why we are where we are, in a way reflects the nature
[Guest]: of the political incentives, and which is why, before I get into the technocratic aspects
[Guest]: of how do you build a more effective state, I first kind of have to make the case that
[Guest]: it is now politically incentive compatible, right, to do this. So then, and one of the
[Guest]: things I say, and again, connecting to your episodes, I think this was the one which Shivam
[Guest]: Shankar Singh, right, on, you know, that politicians are already using data to win elections, okay,
[Guest]: like you've seen so, but they're not yet using data for governance, right, means so,
[Guest]: they know, they have shown that they care about data when it matters to them. Okay,
[Guest]: so can we make that next logical step of starting to use the data for better governance as well.
[Guest]: So part of the point here is to say that, listen, there is political demand now for
[Guest]: delivering governance. But the challenge is that you don't know how to do it. And so can
[Guest]: we create a roadmap on how do you build a more effective state, but that can also deliver
[Guest]: results in a visible timeframe of, say, five years, because I can't go to a chief minister
[Guest]: and saying, aap ye keejiye, pandra saal mein result dekhega, nahi, that doesn't work with
[Guest]: our electoral cycles. So these ideas have to be ideas that demonstrate kind of, you
[Guest]: know, tangible results in a four to five year window. And the good news in topics like education
[Guest]: or nutrition or something like that, and I can say this in chapter 10, is that the future
[Guest]: of these cohorts is yet to be written. Okay, so this is completely in our hands, that every
[Guest]: cohort that is born this year is a future. So the marginal impact of getting these things
[Guest]: right in these first two to five years of life is so enormous, that we don't have to
[Guest]: sit and moan, ke arey, how do we fix all of this stuff? Nahi, you know, there is an enormous
[Guest]: amount of good you can do, if you kind of focus your attention on the things that matter.
[Amit Varma]: Brilliant, I mean, and so what I'm going to do is that, you know, this bird is swooping
[Amit Varma]: through the worm colony down there. In fact, it's such a, you know, I'm so struck by the
[Amit Varma]: idea of the worm colony that I'm just going to name it after myself, we'll call it Verma.
[Guest]: And there's a PJ I need to tell you in this context, which is very funny.
[Unknown]: Kindly, kindly.
[Guest]: Nahi toh humara bahut serious ho jata hai yaar, like is baar my throat is too bad to
[Guest]: sing, but this is a very bad PJ, but it's quite funny. So, and you will like this, right?
[Guest]: So there's this old thing about the early bird gets the worm, right? I mean, as to why
[Guest]: you need to be early, wake up early, but knowing you, you're probably a nocturnal person who
[Guest]: likes to wake up late, right? Like, you know, so, but you can justify being kind of sleeping
[Guest]: in from the worm's perspective by saying that the early worm gets eaten, okay?
[Guest]: That's absolutely brilliant. On the other hand, like the sensible worm should do I might
[Amit Varma]: be waking up late, but I'm not quite lying low once I do wake up. But so I'll sort of
[Amit Varma]: continue your your sort of beautiful narrative from political incentives. You know, you talk
[Amit Varma]: about incentives of politicians so lucidly, and how, you know, given their incentives,
[Amit Varma]: that one, paanch saal ka time frame hai, so they can't do deeper reforms, which will take
[Amit Varma]: time and to manifest where the causality may not be clear. You know, palliatives like loan
[Amit Varma]: waivers are therefore, you know, much more appealing appeals to the vote bank immediately.
[Amit Varma]: They want visible benefits rather than sort of unseen benefits. And you've given an excellent
[Amit Varma]: example of this where you write quote, put simply, it is easier to build new schools
[Amit Varma]: and distribute pictures of opening ceremonies than it is to ensure that teachers are attending
[Amit Varma]: regularly or that children are learning, stop quote, which just sort of illustrates, and
[Amit Varma]: this is why state capacity, therefore suffers. And then you, you know, move on to your second
[Amit Varma]: point about how this creates a systemic overload on the state, because for all the short term
[Amit Varma]: incentives, politicians are committing, committing, committing, committing this, committing that,
[Amit Varma]: and therefore, the, you know, the bureaucracy doesn't have the capacity to deliver on all
[Amit Varma]: of this. And you use a sort of great phrase for this, which comes from Andrews, Pritchett
[Amit Varma]: and Wilcox, premature load bearing. So let's, you know, since you take a segue to weightlifting
[Amit Varma]: for a moment, and just kind of explain this to me, and you know, I found it very revelatory
[Amit Varma]: about the Indian state, and I didn't expect to read about weightlifting in your book,
[Guest]: well done, Karthik. No, and I'm glad you know, so but you can see that the effort that's
[Guest]: gone into kind of taking concepts and finding metaphors to simplify and make it accessible,
[Guest]: right? I mean, but the weightlifting analogy, and I'll also, you know, give away like one
[Guest]: of my favorite paragraphs in the whole book, which is in chapter three. And so, but the,
[Guest]: but the weightlifting analogy is very simple, right? Which is see, if you're a weightlifter
[Guest]: and bodybuilder, and you're trying to build muscle mass, okay, the way you're supposed
[Guest]: to do this is by lifting about two to 5% above your current capacity, okay, like in so, and
[Guest]: that is what just stretches you so there will be some tear in muscle tissue, because you
[Guest]: are going beyond capacity. But then when that muscle rebuilds, it builds stronger, okay,
[Guest]: so you kind of increase your strength by kind of progressively increasing the amount of
[Guest]: load that you're taking on, right? But if you try to lift 100 kilos more than you can,
[Guest]: you will just collapse and die, okay, because that bar will fall on your head and it's over,
[Guest]: right? So, and again, the premature load bearing term is not mine, it comes from Richard Andrews
[Guest]: and Wilcox. But I think the I'm pretty sure that the weightlifting analogy is mine. I
[Guest]: didn't see that there. Okay, but the, but the but the basic point is that, and goes
[Guest]: back to your Fukuyama point of scope, scope and strength is that by trying to do too much,
[Guest]: right, mean that you further weaken the state. So as it is, the capacity is low, and you
[Guest]: further weaken it by putting too much. And that's because of and there are multiple reasons
[Guest]: I explained that in more detail in chapter three in the bureaucracy's burden, right,
[Guest]: which is that when you are trying to do more than you have capacity for, then a lot of
[Guest]: your time goes on rationing access as opposed to delivering, okay, because the claims are
[Guest]: more than my capacity, right? So I have to then sit and the amount of time I spend adjudicating
[Guest]: as to who gets it. And then that creates another problem that once I've adjudicated in a certain
[Guest]: way, the guy who didn't get it goes to the courts, right, to then say, okay, why am I
[Guest]: not getting it? So there are education secretaries who tell me that they spend 30 to 40% of their
[Guest]: time in court cases, I mean, of various sorts, because they're just kind of in dispute. And
[Guest]: so, but here's the point. So what I say in chapter three is that one of the sources of
[Guest]: the knots we have tied ourselves in, so one way to think about this is that because our
[Guest]: aspirations are ahead of our ability to deliver, okay, and I say, government as legislature
[Guest]: passes rights and entitlements that are beyond the capacity of government as executive to
[Guest]: deliver. And then government as judiciary holds government as executive in contempt
[Guest]: of government as legislature saying that you have not fulfilled what you have said you
[Guest]: will do in the law. And in doing that, it further weakens the capacity of government
[Guest]: as executive because that limited capacity is now going to answer the courts. Okay. Now,
[Guest]: this is not to say that the courts don't have a legitimate role in kind of protecting the
[Guest]: rights of the poor, right? Often you will pass rights and not implement them. And where
[Guest]: the courts come in is trying to make sure that those rights are in fact implemented.
[Guest]: But that approach is again, like rearranging the deck chairs on a Titanic, right? Like
[Guest]: you mean, okay, you know, I am coming, therefore, you will do this. But at and you might get
[Guest]: individual relief for the particular plaintiff was brought the case saying that the state
[Guest]: has not fulfilled its obligation to me. But because the constraint is not one of intention,
[Guest]: but the constraint is one of capacity. So what is happening is even when that process
[Guest]: goes through the courts, you might get redress in that individual case, but you're not seeing
[Guest]: the fallout of the other parts of the system that are not getting it because your particular
[Guest]: case has been taken care of, right? And so this problem of kind of overcommitment kind
[Guest]: of is so all pervasive, right? So I'll give you just two days ago, I was talking to a
[Guest]: very, very senior scientist, right? I mean, who was talking about that one of the biggest
[Guest]: sources of frustration for the scientific community in India is how much kind of, you
[Guest]: know, budgets, so you go through a competitive grant process and come coming back and connecting
[Guest]: this to connecting this to research, right? So you apply for grants, you go through this
[Guest]: thing, the review board actually sanctions you the grant, you've gotten your grant, but
[Guest]: then the money will not come for years. Okay. And so there's a finance that doesn't release
[Guest]: me. Okay, but how are you in this place where you have a scientific review process that
[Guest]: evaluates proposals and saying this has to be funded, and then the end, there's no money.
[Guest]: And the answer is, again, not malice. Okay, the answer is that most state budgets actually
[Guest]: have commitments that are well above their revenue. So eventually, like, everybody's
[Guest]: just playing musical chairs, okay, to say, like, I mean, who is going to get this money?
[Guest]: So which is why it's not enough to get the money allocated, you then have to do the additional
[Guest]: jugaad to kind of make sure that your claim. So the entire nature of our politics, the
[Guest]: nature of our governance is essentially a politics of scarcity, a governance of scarcity,
[Guest]: and hence kind of who you know, who you're connected, who you can do to kind of unblock
[Guest]: the state. And the nature of how we interact with the state is, we don't think about it
[Guest]: a level of systems, we think about it and how does my job get done? Okay, like campaign.
[Guest]: And so this is all pervasive. So if you then think about jobs, like one of the biggest
[Guest]: crises for medium and small and micro enterprises today in India. So we do all kinds of things
[Guest]: in terms of credit access this thing, but the biggest crisis is frankly, like how many
[Guest]: of them just don't get paid on time, like for services they've delivered. And the biggest
[Guest]: defaulter is the government, right? I mean, because the government itself doesn't have
[Guest]: the money to meet its own commitments. And then what happens is that the bigger guy is
[Guest]: able to kind of lubricate the wheels and get his payment released, the smaller guy can't
[Guest]: do that, right? So and then, and this again, you know, something I talked about in that
[Guest]: intro chapter, right, which is the cost of this overload is not only that you are, you
[Guest]: know, further reducing state capacity by kind of making them adjudicate, you know, what
[Guest]: allocation and adjudication. So every time you spend deciding who to give something to
[Guest]: is time you're spending not actually delivering the service. Okay, so that's how it is further
[Guest]: cutting into state capacity. Okay. But the other way in which it cuts state capacity
[Guest]: is much deeper and longer term, which is it creates chronic trust deficits. Okay, and
[Guest]: that's something again, I talked about in the intro chapter, because when a state is
[Guest]: over committed, by definition, it cannot serve everybody, right, which means promises are
[Guest]: going to be broken. And over time, the Indian state has broken promises to the rich to the
[Guest]: middle class to the poor, right. So and I give you examples there of say, retrospective
[Guest]: taxation, or even abolishing the privy purses are all kind of, you know, basically, states
[Guest]: going and breaking commitments made to the rich, to the middle classes, it's things like
[Guest]: the procurement delays, right? I mean, that most of these MSMEs are that way. And for
[Guest]: the poor, it is you pass rights and entitlements and never actually fund them. Okay, so but
[Guest]: then what that does is think about how does this further weaken state capacity, it weakens
[Guest]: the trust deficit, weakens state capacity, because when it comes to negotiating very,
[Guest]: very complex reforms, like say, the farm farm laws, and again, you have that episode with
[Guest]: Ajay on that, right? I mean, so the policy per se is fine. But where it breaks down is
[Guest]: the trust deficit, right? Because, see, the way we need to reform our agriculture subsidies
[Guest]: is not to say we are not going to support farmers, because you do want to support farmers,
[Guest]: but you want to support them through income transfers, as opposed to these complex subsidies.
[Guest]: But the problem with income transfers is that people don't trust that this is going to continue
[Guest]: coming, because then you're again in the queue, aap kataar mein hain, like, you know, aapka
[Guest]: number nahi aaya, whereas subsidy is sure, because I'm never paying it out of my pocket,
[Guest]: right? Like, I mean, so I know I have that benefit here for sure. So this is then again,
[Guest]: how complex the system is, right? Because you've got overcommitment, that overcommitment
[Guest]: both reduces your capacity to deliver today, and hurts your capacity to kind of create
[Guest]: these Pareto improving win-win reforms, because of the erosion of trust, right? I mean, over
[Guest]: time, and I think Kaushik Basu has this lovely quote from Republic of Beliefs, right? I mean,
[Guest]: which is that in the end, most of the power of a state comes not actually from the coercive
[Guest]: power of the state, but really comes from a set of self-fulfilling expectations about
[Guest]: what will happen if you deviate from an equilibrium path. Okay, so anyway, so this is again, like
[Guest]: a 10,000 foot view, but hopefully, this kind of highlights some of how deep these challenges
[Guest]: are, right? It's not just a question of saying, chalo, state capacity kar do, it is these
[Guest]: are deep, deep systemic issues.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, so deviate from the equilibrium path is also a great title for a metal song. And
[Amit Varma]: I can imagine, you know, the refrain can be deviate, deviate, deviate, and in the background
[Amit Varma]: full of hate, full of hate also coming up, you know, a couple of a couple of digressive
[Amit Varma]: questions. And what is this, that, you know, in terms of work that people do, I often say
[Amit Varma]: that the form will determine the content and the content shapes a character. I wrote an
[Amit Varma]: essay on this standard example is five hour podcast means I can't be shallow, I have to
[Amit Varma]: listen a lot. The act of listening is an act of humility, you take the ego out of it, you
[Amit Varma]: learn a lot more, and therefore you become a different kind of person. So because of
[Amit Varma]: the form of what I'm doing, I had to act in a particular way, change my character. Similarly,
[Amit Varma]: if you just do a five minute show, you don't even have to read the book, you just ask some
[Amit Varma]: stock questions, you keep interrupting all of that. And across the various domains, this
[Amit Varma]: can really apply. And I'm now thinking of how the form of this state with just by you
[Amit Varma]: know, changing, shaping incentives can change what the people in it are like, I know plenty
[Amit Varma]: of politicians and bureaucrats and so on. And I completely agree with you pretty much
[Amit Varma]: all of the people I know in both these fields are wonderful people. At least, obviously,
[Amit Varma]: my the politicians I know are kind of self selected. So that's it's bound to be the case.
[Amit Varma]: But they're great people, people are not the problem. But what really happens is that all
[Amit Varma]: the way down the line, the form of the state determines the kind of actions that get taken.
[Amit Varma]: And then that determines the kind of person that you are like a friend of mine, Sivash
[Amit Varma]: Rai once spoke about how politics corrodes character, right, which I totally believe
[Amit Varma]: in because of incentives. But here, I'm thinking, wait a minute, let's go one step further back.
[Amit Varma]: It's a state that corrodes politics, and then that corrodes character. So you have this
[Amit Varma]: all powerful, crazy state, you know, and eventually, the best way to flourish within the state,
[Amit Varma]: if you're a part of it is to become a rent seeker. It's just logical, it doesn't mean
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, you are a bad person per se, you're responding to incentives. If you're
[Amit Varma]: a businessman in the 1980s, you know, you got to be a crony capitalist to get ahead,
[Amit Varma]: you know, people condemned Dhirubhai Ambani and all of that, but give me a break, the
[Amit Varma]: system was what it was, he had to do what he had to do then, right. And, and I won't
[Amit Varma]: mention possible current cronyism or whatever. But the point is, there is a system we make
[Amit Varma]: a mistake in often blaming people. And as you pointed out, that's pointless, there is
[Amit Varma]: a system. And the form kind of shapes everything downstream, from the politics to the bureaucracy,
[Amit Varma]: to the notion of public service, to the notion of what a citizen is or should be, you know,
[Amit Varma]: and leads to the apathy and the hostility that we see among the people towards the state,
[Amit Varma]: which you also elaborated upon. So what would sort of be your take on this, that a question
[Amit Varma]: of a dysfunctional state goes way beyond just the functioning of the state and the services
[Amit Varma]: it provides, it changes society?
[Guest]: And I think, see, the goal of this book, I mean, in some ways is, it is actually very,
[Guest]: very sympathetic towards all of the individuals involved while kind of taking a step back
[Guest]: to illustrate to everybody, right, the complexities of the system and why we are the way we are,
[Guest]: right. Now, I think the good news is this, the good news is that there are so many public
[Guest]: spirited people, right, I encounter at every stage in the government outside the number
[Guest]: of youngsters, like, I mean, who kind of want to contribute. And, you know, I think there
[Guest]: is just, there's an incredible amount of energy, right, that wants to do good. Okay. And, you
[Guest]: know, one of the reasons I have this chapter 18 about state citizen and civil society,
[Guest]: right, I mean, is to then kind of think about what does the understanding that has been
[Guest]: laid out in the book imply for different sets of actors in society, right, I mean, who want
[Guest]: to kind of play their own positive role in kind of moving us in this direction that we
[Guest]: need to as a country. Now, of course, this is not to say that, like, you know, that doing
[Guest]: this will solve all of our problems. I mean, the nature of politics in every society is
[Guest]: it is about contestation over public resources, it's about contestation over policy, and that
[Guest]: will never change. Okay, I think the key point in the Indian context is that because so much
[Guest]: of our public discourse is zero sum, okay, so it is, you know, whether it's our talking
[Guest]: shows on TV, it's like all big fight, you know, that that culture is essentially fighting.
[Guest]: And even at a more sophisticated level of discourse, when we're talking about budgets,
[Guest]: okay, so budget discussion will happen. And most of the discussion will be around is sector
[Guest]: co q&a allocate care, right? I mean, but the all I'm hoping to do here is to kind of say
[Guest]: that so much of this reflects the basic problem. And it's econ 101, right, we start as economics
[Guest]: 101 to saying that our desires are greater than our resources, and there are trade offs.
[Guest]: So that same logic applies at the level of a country, right? I mean, so, but my point
[Guest]: is not that we will ever move away from this world that the desires are exceeding the resources,
[Guest]: but given where we are as a country, that we will do so a simple way of saying this
[Guest]: is that our discourse focuses in the top line of budget allocations. Whereas if we focus
[Guest]: in the bottom line of what actually reaches people, you will find that there are low hanging
[Guest]: fruit and things that can be done that are just win, win, win, win, win for everyone.
[Guest]: Okay, like, I mean, and so then the and going back to kind of our Ajay and Vijay, right?
[Guest]: I mean, it's a great book. And that's why I love that they call it the art and the science
[Guest]: of policy, right? Because, I mean, in some ways, the science of policy is kind of illustrating
[Guest]: what the principles and trade offs are the art is, how do you craft politically viable
[Guest]: win, win kind of, you know, arrangements that everybody can be better off with. And I think
[Guest]: I mentioned that, even in the first episode, right? So when you talked about politics,
[Guest]: it shows character. So there is an element of politics that I have zero interest in,
[Guest]: right? I mean, which is the pursuit of power. And that's the part that is corrosive. But
[Guest]: there's an element of politics, which I think anybody working in policy, it's almost like
[Guest]: a moral obligation that you think about, which is the part of politics, which I actually
[Guest]: enjoy is thinking about how do you craft a win, win arrangement, right? How do you expand
[Guest]: the size of the pie, right? I mean, and that also requires a lot of creative thinking,
[Guest]: but it requires kind of being, you know, politically aware, right, even if not politically aligned,
[Amit Varma]: right? So yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So I want to sort of recap that sort of narrative up to now, because I find it so lucidly explanatory,
[Amit Varma]: and then ask a question about the trust deficit, as it were, and you point out how incentives
[Amit Varma]: changed after independence, where your initial incentive is nation building, the Congress
[Amit Varma]: is dominating it, you know, and everyone's moving in one direction. And then gradually,
[Amit Varma]: the big tent kind of collapses, opposition comes up, political incentives get in the
[Amit Varma]: way. And those incentives lead politicians to act for reasons other than just necessarily
[Amit Varma]: the public good, because they do have to win elections, that's their imperative, they,
[Amit Varma]: you know, etc, etc. That leads to a systemic overload, they promise too much, they can't
[Amit Varma]: all deliver that further weakens the state, weightlifters are dropping weights on their
[Amit Varma]: head all over the place. This is a brilliant metaphor. And this leads to a trust deficit,
[Amit Varma]: because then inevitably, the state is over promising and under delivering. And eventually,
[Amit Varma]: they can deliver on nothing and the people get apathetic, and they learn to live without
[Amit Varma]: the state, as it were, and they do their own jugars to get by. Now, my question here is
[Amit Varma]: this, that when you, you know, raised the example of the farm laws, what I kind of thought
[Amit Varma]: to myself is that the problem here isn't just that there is a deficit of trust in the state,
[Amit Varma]: the state might well have taken a different kind of procedure, you know, set up committees
[Amit Varma]: gone out and spoken to all stakeholders, spoken to farmers groups done all of that, a lot
[Amit Varma]: of which Ajay in his episode with me on the farm laws also talks about. But the insurmountable
[Amit Varma]: problem here is politics. And the insurmountable problem is that our politics has become so
[Amit Varma]: incredibly polarized, that you will always demonize the other side, every single thing
[Amit Varma]: they do is wrong, and you cannot talk to each other. And this hasn't been the case throughout
[Amit Varma]: our 75 years. It, you know, in past governments, you had people speaking to each other in 2014,
[Amit Varma]: when the Jaitley ministry took over from the Chidambaram ministry, there was a fair amount
[Amit Varma]: of continuity for a while. Back in the day when the Vajpayee government was there, they
[Amit Varma]: would speak to the opposition regularly, there was that mutual respect, especially when it
[Amit Varma]: came to matters of policy, whatever public rhetoric may have been outside. That is simply
[Amit Varma]: not the case today, that the discourse is so incredibly polarized that you cannot be
[Amit Varma]: talking to the enemy, you can only be shouting at them and dragging them through the streets
[Amit Varma]: if you are in power, you know, on an aside, I mean, there was this visual, there was this
[Amit Varma]: video recently of, you know, cops dragging Priyanka Gandhi, dragging her through the
[Amit Varma]: street into a police van and all that. And it's just, you know, and that to me is a symbol
[Amit Varma]: of how the opposition is being treated. And it is, of course, also tactically stupid on
[Amit Varma]: the part of the BJP, because the lady is a nobody, why make her a somebody in this manner.
[Amit Varma]: But it's, but that's really a symbol of the way you're looking at the opposition that
[Amit Varma]: when we are in power, we will mess you over. But and, you know, for those in the opposition,
[Amit Varma]: everything Modi does must be opposed, even if it's good, you know, a lot of the what
[Amit Varma]: the farm laws were setting out to do was you was in the Congress manifesto, for God's sake,
[Amit Varma]: right. So but that doesn't matter anymore. So on the one hand, there is a polarized politics
[Amit Varma]: where you cannot possibly talk to the enemy anymore, quote unquote enemy anymore. And
[Amit Varma]: two, there seems to be this realization, and I hope it's overconfidence, that narratives
[Amit Varma]: matter more than governance, that people out of rational ignorance, a term, you know, public
[Amit Varma]: choice, people would recognize out of rational ignorance, don't really know that much about
[Amit Varma]: policy and long term structural problems. And they don't really care about those things.
[Amit Varma]: And they've given up hope of expecting anything from the government anyway. So everything,
[Amit Varma]: therefore, is about narratives. So that meeting point, which you talk about, you know, where
[Amit Varma]: you say that, you know, in a case like the farm laws, had they gone about it the correct
[Amit Varma]: way, the trust deficit could have been overcome. I am not confident about it for that, for
[Amit Varma]: that sort of reason. And just as an analog, you mentioned the Josie Joseph episode, you
[Amit Varma]: know, and you mentioned earlier that the worry some people have that if you have a more powerful
[Amit Varma]: state, it will be used against its enemies. And I am actually sometimes really thankful
[Amit Varma]: that the Indian state is so weak and incompetent, because at this moment in time, the way our
[Amit Varma]: politics has become, the Indian state is definitely, it can be used for malicious purposes, as
[Amit Varma]: Josie shows in that excellent episode and is really fine book. And that also kind of,
[Amit Varma]: you know, bolsters this doubt that I sort of have. So what are your thoughts?
[Guest]: Yeah, so I think, you know, there's a lot in there. And let me save my, you know, reactions
[Guest]: to the broader point about the space for dialogue, right? I mean, across the political spectrum
[Guest]: across, you know, so for example, one thing I'll say is, there is a reason why some of
[Guest]: the more contentious decisions like financial allocations are given to nonpartisan technical
[Guest]: commissions like a finance commission. Now, of course, in the end, there is still a political
[Guest]: process that has to accept or kind of, you know, reject parts of the recommendations.
[Guest]: But there is at least, you know, in the institutional design of India, there was a recognition that
[Guest]: there are some kind of truly contentious issues like, you know, that are best done away from
[Guest]: the daily limelight, right? I mean, where you can have these discussions. And that's
[Guest]: true of international relations, it's true everywhere. And so we can talk a little bit
[Guest]: about that. I think this question about where are we, right? I mean, with regard to, you
[Guest]: know, with this, is a stronger state, a bad idea in the hands of malevolent actors, okay,
[Guest]: I think is really the core kind of existential question, okay? And I think we have to have
[Guest]: faith in the longer arc of Indian democracy, as saying that this is, you know, that we
[Guest]: have put in deep enough roots of what kind of democratic, and like Ram Gohar says at
[Guest]: the end of his book, right? It's 50-50, everything in India is 50-50, right? Like, you know,
[Guest]: there are areas where we have done very well, and there are areas where there is still room
[Guest]: to go. But I think the Germany-Greece, you know, example, so is a useful one, right?
[Guest]: Which is, yes, at the peak of kind of a malevolent regime, there was more damage done, like,
[Guest]: you know, by a capable German state than by a less capable Spanish or Italian state, right?
[Guest]: But if you integrate over kind of 100 years span, right? I mean, would you then rather
[Guest]: have be a citizen in Germany, right? I mean, so effectively, what happened there was that
[Guest]: the political, so there was a strong state, there was a political process of reflection
[Guest]: of the things that had gone wrong, that then led to really important course corrections
[Guest]: and guardrails around, like, you know, what the state could do. And so this is where I
[Guest]: think, again, trying to be slightly optimistic, see my book, by focusing on state level actions,
[Guest]: my hope is to also strengthen in some ways, Indian democracy itself, because you see,
[Guest]: you can't beat something with nothing, okay? You can't just keep complaining without showing
[Guest]: a better alternative, okay? So the problem today is that any kind of complaints about
[Guest]: the BJP from the opposition just rings hollow, because they are just as dictatorial in their
[Guest]: own states, okay? Like, you know, so, and that doesn't give you much of a moral locus
[Guest]: stand I to have that conversation, okay? So, but part of the point here is, if you're an
[Guest]: opposition parties, that is genuinely trying to raise some issues about saying that, you
[Guest]: know, the intelligence agencies or the police are being weaponized, and this is bad, okay?
[Guest]: So it's not enough to just say that, you say, listen, here is kind of a model bill, like
[Guest]: a mean of a police reform bill that we are bringing in our state, okay? Like, I mean,
[Guest]: and we are walking the talk. Similarly, data, right? So I think Pramit had this very nice
[Guest]: thing at the end, where he talked about, you know, his model kind of data bill, okay? So
[Guest]: today, we might say that, listen, how come we don't have poverty measures, we don't have
[Guest]: this data, but there's nothing. But the truth is, every political leader is afraid of data
[Guest]: and accountability, right? I mean, it's not just, you know, that's across the system, right?
[Guest]: So I think the point about, and I say this at the end of the of the section on state
[Guest]: level action, right, is that, however difficult our problems are, right, you need to find
[Guest]: a constructive pathway forward, right? I mean, that just doesn't wallow in despair. And one
[Guest]: of the ways, and again, in the federalism chapter, you know, and I end with an Ashwin
[Guest]: Mahesh quote, right? I mean, which is, we need to increase the number of problem solvers.
[Guest]: So and that's true at the level of local government, but it's also true at the level of states,
[Guest]: right? I mean, so, and the reason the book is targeted at chief ministers and state level
[Guest]: actions, and why I think we'll do an entire episode on federalism, hopefully, after two
[Guest]: hours, we'll kind of start that at some point, is that, is that by kind of increasing the
[Guest]: number of actors who can function in a positive way, you just need one or two people to do
[Guest]: it, right? I mean, and then positive examples, then, you know, will hopefully, will hopefully
[Guest]: spread. So yeah, so you need to kind of be cautiously optimistic and think about what
[Guest]: are the, instead of despairing, say, what are, what are the entry points to move us
[Guest]: closer towards the kind of, you know, modern citizen centered, democratic Indian Republic
[Guest]: that we would like to be? And one of the core contentions in the book, and which is why
[Guest]: again, federalism, we'll talk about this, is that Indian states are bigger than most
[Guest]: countries, right? I mean, and so there is no reason why they cannot take the lead in
[Guest]: terms of doing some of these things. And it's not like I have rosy tinted glasses to say
[Guest]: that all of these things will happen every place. But the logic of working at the state
[Guest]: level is even if the book has a menu of 50 ideas, right, and I think I said this in the
[Guest]: earlier podcast as well, is that trying to make these changes at an all India level is
[Guest]: really, really hard, both because of kind of the number of larger number of veto players,
[Guest]: as well as the sheer complexity. But if you can kind of show that some ideas work, right,
[Guest]: so different states will have different political priorities, right? So people will take up
[Guest]: things here and there. And I'll give you like, you know, something I say in the, in the,
[Guest]: in the politics chapter, right? So we tend to think about all politicians, again, as
[Guest]: venal and corrupt and whatever. And there's a very senior IAS officer who actually gave
[Guest]: me this nice perspective. He said, every leader cares about vote, note and dil. Okay, like,
[Guest]: you know, so yes, they care about votes, they care about raising money. But each of them
[Guest]: also has a heart, they're in public service to try to do something good. Okay. And so,
[Guest]: and because different politicians will have their dil in some places, okay. So imagine
[Guest]: there is somebody who's seen like child mortality or maternal mortality in his or her household,
[Guest]: therefore cares about doing something. And there have been politicians who personally
[Guest]: care about things. Imagine there is somebody who got beaten up in a lockup as a student
[Guest]: activist, like I mean, and therefore cares more about police reforms, right? So you kind
[Guest]: of have to find these windows. So the opportunity will be the luck will be when there is somebody
[Guest]: in a particular place who cares about a certain issue. The preparation is that when there
[Guest]: is a well thought out set of reform roadmaps that that person can do. And by working at
[Guest]: the state level, you're just kind of dramatically increasing the number of bites we have at
[Guest]: the apple of kind of making the reforms needed to move the country in a positive direction.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, I mean, I totally agree with all of that, even though it may not seem like it
[Amit Varma]: from the question that came before, you know, I had this discussion with Akar Patel on pessimism
[Amit Varma]: versus optimism. And he was an optimist, of course, he is an optimist, despite everything
[Amit Varma]: that goes on with him. And I'm a bit of a pessimist. But the way I see it is that even
[Amit Varma]: if I'm a pessimist, and even if I think the world is going to hell, my dharma is to behave
[Amit Varma]: as if I'm an optimist. So, you know, that's kind of what I do.
[Guest]: I think somebody once said this, right? Pessimism of the intellect, optimism of the spirit,
[Amit Varma]: right? Like, you know, I mean, that's a beautiful phrase. That describes me. Well, thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you. That's, that's a worm's eye view of Amit Verma, I guess, which I hadn't thought
[Amit Varma]: of before. The one point where I will kind of push back before kind of moving on is when
[Amit Varma]: you, you know, made the comparison between Germany and Greece, who would I rather be?
[Amit Varma]: Now, the thing is, would I rather be Germany in the 20th century, through the 20th century
[Amit Varma]: or Greece through the 20th century? And I love prosperity and Germany is much more prosperous,
[Amit Varma]: but I would rather be Greece. And the reason for that is that where you stand depends on
[Amit Varma]: how you sit. If I'm a Jew in 1940 Germany, that's not where I want to be. You cannot
[Amit Varma]: ignore that. You cannot get to the later prosperity by, you know, first suffering through the
[Amit Varma]: Holocaust and all that. Similarly, you know, if you're a Muslim in India today, do you
[Amit Varma]: want a stronger state or a weaker state? Do you just want the state to kind of leave you
[Amit Varma]: alone and we'll get by as we are? But that's a tangential question. I mean, I totally agree
[Guest]: with your larger point.
[Guest]: Exactly. And no, I mean, and listen, you know, this is not in any ways to trivialise like,
[Guest]: you know, and this is not to say that, you know, German prosperity trumped everything.
[Guest]: I think the larger point I was making was that there was also this political moment
[Guest]: of reflection about like, you know, and learning. So you can't undo the past. What you can do
[Guest]: is kind of, you know, take the right lessons and build the institutional kind of structures.
[Guest]: So I think, you know, the other nice thing about doing this on the 75th, you know, Day
[Guest]: of Independence, literally, is as we take stock about both the successes and the failures,
[Guest]: I do think it's a time for reimagining, right? I mean, you know, what the Constituent Assembly
[Guest]: did. There was this kind of, it was a work of magic, right? I mean, in terms of what
[Guest]: that represented, the sheer ambition of what was there. And I think, and again, you know,
[Guest]: I think Ram Gohar says this very nicely, right, when he says that, you know, it takes visionaries
[Guest]: to craft, to build a country. And then, you know, over time, the roots have gone deep
[Guest]: enough that mediocrities can run it. Okay, like, you know, so, right, like, you know,
[Guest]: but that's true, just as much of the US and he says, like, you know, going from Jefferson
[Guest]: to George W. Bush, like, you know, would feel pretty similar, right? So it's not just about,
[Guest]: you know, it's there in all societies. But I do think as we take stock about where we
[Guest]: are as a country, there is kind of a genuine need for a reimagination of kind of possibilities.
[Guest]: And, you know, public conversations about what we want to be as a country, but not just
[Guest]: in this kind of knee jerk, criticizing everything that the government is doing, or supporting
[Guest]: everything that they're doing, right? I mean, it is kind of just being very, very grounded
[Guest]: and empirical, and just saying, this is where we've done well, this is where we're not doing
[Guest]: well. And so how do we kind of get to the next level of what we need to do as a country?
[Guest]: And like, I think, I think Dr. Kelkar said this nicely, right, they see their book as
[Guest]: kind of essentially a contribution into this yajna of building a better India, right? I
[Guest]: mean, and so, you know, we all make a little contributions, and then there is a larger
[Guest]: ecosystem that has to act.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, so I love the way you know, we are using words like yajna and dharma in our conversation,
[Amit Varma]: this is like turning out to have very Indic feel to it. Now, you know, I want to talk
[Amit Varma]: about federalism, which we can talk about for seven or eight hours, but I don't know
[Amit Varma]: how much time you have. But before we get there, and we'll do that after the break.
[Amit Varma]: But before we get to the break, I want to ask a final question about sort of state capacity.
[Amit Varma]: But first, I'll briefly sum up the rest of your narrative that number one, we've seen
[Amit Varma]: how political incentives, incentives, did I say incentives, deteriorate, we see the
[Amit Varma]: systemic overload, we see, you know, weightlifters dying all over the place. And in different
[Amit Varma]: government departments, we see trust deficits happening. So nobody trusts politician anymore.
[Amit Varma]: You've also spoken about the ineffective bureaucracy. And I love the way of your chapter titles
[Amit Varma]: are alliterative bureaucrats burden politicians predicament. But you talk about the structural
[Amit Varma]: weaknesses within our bureaucracy, all the paperwork, all of that. What does that lead?
[Amit Varma]: What does this breakdown of the state leads to? It leads to what you call an elite exit,
[Amit Varma]: because elites are, you know, doing their private jogar. And, you know, they have in
[Amit Varma]: your words, quote, mostly seceded from being recipients of public services, stop, quote,
[Amit Varma]: and because they're not receiving public services, they don't give a damn if they're crap, and
[Amit Varma]: they're not raising their voice, and so on and so forth. You give examples of services
[Amit Varma]: are better when elites are recipients, and all of that. You talk about the institute
[Amit Varma]: institutional stasis. And how fixing the problem is so hard. You also talk, you know, talk
[Amit Varma]: in detail about why we should reform state capacity, how the ROI is high, how it's key
[Amit Varma]: to India's development, how the benefits would be broad based, you know, where you come up
[Amit Varma]: with that aeroplane analogy, that even if India's elites today are in first class or
[Amit Varma]: business class, and the poor are an economy class, no matter what the condition of the
[Amit Varma]: classes, if the if the plane is going to crash is going to crash, everybody's gone. So the
[Amit Varma]: final question before the break that I want to sort of end with before we talk about federalism
[Amit Varma]: and that's like a natural segue, because that is one of the solutions is, so how do we reform
[Amit Varma]: the Indian state? Like what gives you hope that it can be reformed, given that everyone's
[Amit Varma]: interests will be to protect their own interests, there'll be the status quo bias, there'll
[Amit Varma]: be this big beast that you're kind of fighting against. So what gives you hope that it can
[Amit Varma]: be reformed? And then what are the broad areas in which you would say, okay, this is how
[Amit Varma]: we must reform it?
[Guest]: Yeah, and you know, I'll give you a very short answer. And then on the how maybe we can come
[Guest]: to the very end, right? I mean, because the reason is, the other thing, so let me give
[Guest]: you a quick reason why I'm optimistic. Okay, so and that is related to the work we've been
[Guest]: doing. And this is also something I first publicly alluded to in our education podcast,
[Guest]: right? I mean, which is, I've been setting up and building this new nonprofit called
[Guest]: CJIS, right, which is the Center for Effective Governance of Indian States. This is something,
[Guest]: you know, we started in 2019. And in fact, I had written a concept note for this as early
[Guest]: as 2018, early 2018. And I talked to multiple states. And the idea at that time, I had even
[Guest]: called it an Institute for Public Performance Management, right? I mean, because that we
[Guest]: had a lot of discussion, there's a lot of policy think tanks that says, yeh karna hai.
[Guest]: But there was really nobody working at the space of building a more effective state,
[Guest]: right? And so that was kind of my thinking behind, you know, a concept note for that
[Guest]: kind of center or institute. And then, you know, my well wishes in government, I mean,
[Guest]: I presented to multiple chief secretaries, finance secretaries, and they all said, listen,
[Guest]: this is great. But why don't you first write a book, right? A book that lays out an intellectual
[Guest]: roadmap for what we kind of need to do. And then we can think about finding ways, you
[Guest]: know, there are existing centers of good governance in Telangana, you know, different states have,
[Guest]: you know, their own kind of structures, maybe we could do something around those institutes,
[Guest]: right? So, and that's how the idea of the book was born. But it was always in my mind
[Guest]: is that I didn't just want to be an armchair Ivory Tower academic and saying yeh sab karna
[Guest]: chahiye, right? I mean, that, you know, you really have to kind of put your money where
[Guest]: your mouth is and walk the talk in terms of trying to make these things happen. And so,
[Guest]: in around late 2018, I think, you know, I've known Ashish Dhawan for a long time, and you
[Guest]: should have him on the show at some point. But, you know, he's kind of just this wonderful
[Guest]: kind of philanthropist who's kind of shifted from being a venture capitalist in the world
[Guest]: of companies to being kind of an early stage venture capitalist in the space of institutions,
[Guest]: right? I mean, that India needs. And so, you know, I discussed this, he said, listen, this
[Guest]: is a great idea, I'll fund it, let's just get started, right? I mean, so, you know,
[Guest]: we started very, very slow. The idea was because we ourselves, I had some clarity on what we
[Guest]: want to get done, but very little kind of understanding of how to get it done, right?
[Guest]: I mean, and so, but the long story short, like I said, I think in 20, in the education
[Guest]: episode, I didn't even want to talk much about it, because I was like, listen, I mean, abhi
[Guest]: toh idea hai, we haven't done anything. So, I mean, at this stage, it's still very nascent,
[Guest]: okay, but we are already in four states, right? I mean, and expanding rapidly. And I think
[Guest]: why I feel optimistic is that the level of demand I'm seeing, right, I mean, for the
[Guest]: core offering of CJIS, right, which is an element of conceptual clarity on what are
[Guest]: the reforms that we need, plus kind of implementation support to make those things happen. And that
[Guest]: is the key, right? I mean, so, why am I founding CJIS? See, over the years, I have helped with
[Guest]: plan documents, I have lectured in the IAS Academy, talked to many senior IAS officers,
[Guest]: I've even been on the Chief Minister's Advisory Council. The problem is that all of the advice
[Guest]: and inputs doesn't translate into much because the constraint is state capacity, right? Like,
[Guest]: I mean, toh aap gyaan toh sab de sakte hai, right? Karna is what is the hard part. So,
[Guest]: the logic then of CJIS is to say that you, the government, and so, and this is why I
[Guest]: think the case, the simple value proposition of CJIS is very simple, right? I mean, that
[Guest]: whether it's the politicians, or whether it's the bureaucrats, you're focused on driving
[Guest]: the car, okay? Like, I mean, we are your kind of system maintenance and strengthening people.
[Guest]: And just like that, the race car driver gets the glory, right? But every Formula One driver
[Guest]: depends on a really effective engineering team, mechanical team, like, I mean, that's
[Guest]: designing, maintaining and running the car, okay? So, as CJIS, like, you know, we are
[Guest]: basically kind of working with state governments to start helping improve again, the core conceptual
[Guest]: focus is these three things, is outcomes, personnel and budgets, right? And we'll talk
[Guest]: about this in federalism as well, that the effective organizations are those that provide
[Guest]: autonomy to frontline staff on process, on how to deliver, but accountability on outcomes,
[Guest]: okay? Whereas in the government, we do exactly the opposite, which is we micromanage on process
[Guest]: with zero accountability for outcomes, right? So, but to do this re-architecture, the foundation
[Guest]: is, again, better data, right? So, we are starting with very, and I'll give you more
[Guest]: examples at the end, right? Very, very unglamorous, but plumbing work of improving kind of frontline
[Guest]: state functioning, and I can talk about this. Now, the good news is that we have been very,
[Guest]: very, very, very understated, because we really want the governments to say, is this of any
[Guest]: value or not, right? I mean, so, the only reason I'm even talking about it is we do
[Guest]: need to recruit, you know, as we grow, okay? So, and that's something that, you know, may
[Guest]: be of interest to particularly younger listeners. But the good news, why am I optimistic is
[Guest]: just the amount of demand I'm seeing, right? I mean, and of course, because we're a nonprofit,
[Guest]: and we don't take a paisa from the government, right? So, there's an additional level of
[Guest]: trust, I mean, that comes from that, and also the years of my, you know, spending time in
[Guest]: the IS Academy, kind of showing a long term commitment to these issues. So, it's not like
[Guest]: some flyby consultant who's now, you know, trying to make money of the next, you know,
[Guest]: of the next fad, right? I mean, there is, yeah, there is, this is a 25 year vision and
[Guest]: agenda of kind of, you know, the book is hopefully trying to say, here are the things we need
[Guest]: to get done. And CJIS is kind of a little attempt to help accelerate, make that happen.
[Guest]: So, the reason I'm optimistic is the demand we are seeing. So, just in the past, you know,
[Guest]: and we've been very lucky that a wonderful IAS officer actually quit and joined as president
[Guest]: of CJIS. So, that gives us, you know, both credibility within the government that we
[Guest]: are not just ivory tower academics, but people who really know how the government works.
[Guest]: And because of kind of word of mouth, suddenly, we're getting demand from four extra states
[Guest]: that, frankly, this time, the constraint is more kind of people and capacity and not overextending,
[Guest]: but I really feel optimistic. And see, I think, again, the individuals that are, you know,
[Guest]: so there are people and senior people in government who, when I've talked about this vision, and
[Guest]: I'll say, you know, sir, am I being delusional, okay, in thinking that any of these things
[Guest]: will happen? And they'll say, no, no, this is actually one of the most inspiring things
[Guest]: we've heard in a very long time, because hum sabko malum hai, ki yeh karna hai, but none
[Guest]: of us is able to do it, because, you know, we are, see, tomorrow, if you're talking about
[Guest]: personal reforms, okay, an education secretary will say, haan, yeh karna hai, but the reforms
[Guest]: that are needed are beyond the limit of just an education secretary, right? Because doing
[Guest]: personal reforms requires, you know, coordination with finance, coordination with planning,
[Guest]: coordination with kind of with law, with the general administration department, and also
[Guest]: the chief minister's office, because these are politically sensitive issues. So even
[Guest]: if you have an individual officer who really cares about this, there isn't kind of either
[Guest]: the time or the locus standi, because this guy's going to get transferred in 18 months
[Guest]: or two years. So it's completely irrational to attempt a system reform kind of thing,
[Guest]: whereas these things are going to take five years, 10 years, right? So the hope is that
[Guest]: there is enough kind of buy-in, but the hope is that we're also investing in the kind of
[Guest]: institution that can help make this transition happen. But yeah, you know, like, we may fail,
[Guest]: but you have to be optimistic.
[Amit Varma]: No, and that is indeed so inspiring, even for me, you know, I once wrote this piece
[Amit Varma]: on Vishwanathan Anand, where I was comparing the really shoddy pedagogy he got as a youngster
[Amit Varma]: where, you know, the pedagogy in India or you know, the chess ecosystem was nowhere
[Amit Varma]: near what the Soviets had, right? They were taught fundas and like the second standard
[Amit Varma]: which Anand would have to have to figure out as an adult while actually playing. And the
[Amit Varma]: metaphor I use was that for him winning the world championship was that it was like he
[Amit Varma]: took a Maruti 800 car to a Formula One race and actually won with it. And I'm thinking
[Amit Varma]: of you and what you're trying to do is, while a Maruti 800 car is somehow spluttering ahead,
[Amit Varma]: you are trying to convert it by changing little bits of it into an F1 car. And the metaphor
[Amit Varma]: is inexact because you can't actually do that to a Maruti 800. But somehow I have at this
[Amit Varma]: moment in time, perhaps I'm getting carried away and irrational faith that this could
[Amit Varma]: actually work in the long run. See, in the long run, I'm an optimist, but in the long
[Amit Varma]: run, we are all dead, you know. So before we go in for a quick commercial break and
[Amit Varma]: emerge to talk about federalism, since you, you know, a question I'd save for the end,
[Amit Varma]: but I might as well ask it now since you mentioned that you're looking for bright young people
[Amit Varma]: who want to work with you and so on and so forth. Where should they write to you? Is
[Guest]: there a public website?
[Guest]: Yeah, we can share, you know, I think this is the CJIS website always has like a job
[Guest]: section that, you know, is constantly updated, it'll probably grow. Yeah, so that's, that's
[Guest]: the place I think. So people should not write to me about CJIS because I don't get involved
[Guest]: operationally at all, right? I mean, so there's a full time team that does it, you know, I'm
[Guest]: kind of a co founder and scientific director. So my role is to kind of set an intellectual
[Guest]: roadmap and kind of get the buy in at the government side. But then Vijay, who's a pretty
[Guest]: legendary officer from, from Tamil Nadu in terms of integrity is, you know, is the president
[Guest]: and he runs the show, right? So yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Both Vijay's name today are legendary, therefore. I'll link that from the show notes, by the
[Amit Varma]: way. And let's take a quick commercial break. And on the other side, we will talk about
[Amit Varma]: federalism and going more and more local.
[Unknown]: Hi, my name is Nishant Jain. And besides creating episode art for Amit, I also make the Sneaky
[Unknown]: Art Podcast, a show where I have deep, insightful conversations with other artists who, just
[Unknown]: like me, draw and paint their world from observation. This show is for you if you are trying to
[Unknown]: be an artist. It is also for you if you just want to make more room for art in your life.
[Unknown]: This show is for you if you simply want to become a more mindful observer of your fast-changing
[Unknown]: world. Conversations include a cross-country cyclist making a painting every day of an
[Unknown]: incredible 4,000-mile journey, an artist in Malaysia who found inspiration in a reality
[Unknown]: show about tattoo artists in LA, and a sketcher in Mumbai who chronicled the lives of the
[Unknown]: city's artisans through the first wave of COVID. It is a more beautiful world once you
[Unknown]: begin to see the sneaky art of everyday life. Add Sneaky Art to your podcast feed. Use the
[Unknown]: link in the episode description.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the Scene in the Unseen. I'm here again with Karthik Mullidharan, who has
[Amit Varma]: taken a break, who has eaten some food, his first meal of the day, and who is still optimistic
[Amit Varma]: and who was just telling me before we started recording that the treadmill in his office
[Amit Varma]: is a metaphor for his life. Kindly explain.
[Guest]: No, I think, you know, we were just talking about exercise and how I do walk a lot. And
[Guest]: one of the reasons I've heard so many of your podcasts is I walk a lot. But yeah, so the
[Guest]: treadmill is a metaphor for my life because I walk a lot but stay in the same place with
[Guest]: regard to weight loss. And that's because I also enjoy my food.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, as you two would say, running to stand still, which is kind of, you know, in different
[Amit Varma]: ways, maybe, you know, parts of the Indian state are a little bit like that. Let's let's
[Amit Varma]: sort of talk about federalism. Now, in a sense, the Indian state was designed to be a federal
[Amit Varma]: state, a union of states, as Rahul Gandhi put it in Parliament recently, and as our
[Amit Varma]: constitution begins. So we were designed to be federal, yet we were designed to be incredibly
[Amit Varma]: centralized at the same time. So I'd like you to sort of disentangle this by first speaking
[Amit Varma]: about the aspect in which we were designed to be federal, like how are we federal? What
[Amit Varma]: does federalism mean? And how you know, you talk about the five tiers of the Indian state
[Amit Varma]: and all of that. So again, as you know, you so helpfully defined the term state capacity,
[Amit Varma]: define federalism, you know, what does it mean? And how does that meaning apply to us
[Guest]: right now?
[Guest]: Yes, I think, you know, even before we get into that, you know, consistent with my, you
[Guest]: know, conceptual, I like to take a step back to see, you know, what is the big picture
[Guest]: of the concept? So let's start with a very, very basic question. Okay. So imagine a thought
[Guest]: experiment that you are to be reborn, and you can be a random person born in any country
[Guest]: in any in any part of the world, you do not get to pick where in the country's income
[Guest]: distribution you will be. So this is kind of a veil of ignorance exercise. The only
[Guest]: parameter you're allowed to pick is would you rather be born in a big country defined
[Guest]: as population, say over 50 million, a medium country, say population, you know, 20 to 50
[Guest]: million or a small country in a population under 20 million. Okay. So how do you think
[Guest]: about what would be the optimal size of a country? Okay, where you would like to be
[Amit Varma]: born?
[Amit Varma]: Oh, you're asking me? No, I mean, the answer is, it depends. And the reason that is the
[Amit Varma]: case is like, one, as I have often expressed, I think, you know, population is a great thing.
[Amit Varma]: People talk about, you know, population as being one reason India is so poor, and blah,
[Amit Varma]: blah, blah. No, I think that's the reason we are poor is a failure of governance. I
[Amit Varma]: think more people mean larger economic networks, networks of scale, people are brains, not
[Amit Varma]: stomachs.
[Guest]: And by the way, like, in the spirit of our healthy disagreement in the past, like, let
[Guest]: me push back on that a little bit, right, which is I fundamentally agree with the argument
[Guest]: that people are brains and not stomachs. But for the brains to develop, the stomachs have
[Guest]: to be fed. Okay.
[Amit Varma]: I haven't finished my answer. So just to just to go through, that's why I said it depends.
[Amit Varma]: So you're the initial answer from the notion that more people are good people are brains
[Amit Varma]: not stomachs. You know, it's easy to say that India, Bangladesh, so overpopulated, but equally
[Amit Varma]: you look at Bahrain and Monaco, and you look at just the density of people. I mean, the
[Amit Varma]: whole movement of human beings through human history is from a place of less population
[Amit Varma]: density to a place of more population density that is towards cities. That's what urbanization
[Amit Varma]: is all about. Because, again, economic networks, networks of scale. However, the flip side
[Amit Varma]: of that is that you also need good governance to actually, you know, sort of enable all
[Amit Varma]: these forces to express themselves. And if you are stuck in a large company with bad
[Amit Varma]: governance, then it's a problem. So that's the imponderable. And that is why my answer
[Amit Varma]: has to be, it depends because of veil of ignorance, there's too much ignorance. If you tell me
[Guest]: what the state is like, I'll give you my answer.
[Guest]: Correct. No, see, but in a way, I was even abstracting from the nature of the state.
[Guest]: And I guess, you know, I shouldn't put you on the spot like that. And, you know, just
[Guest]: take a step back and just think about, independent of the nature of the state of the government,
[Guest]: right? Let's just think about the mechanics of size, okay? So the way to conceptually
[Guest]: think about this question about the optimal size of nations is to say, what are the benefits
[Guest]: of size? And what are the costs of size? And as with everything, right, there are both
[Guest]: costs and benefits, right? Now, the thing is, there are actually many, many, many benefits
[Guest]: of size, okay? So historically, the biggest benefit of size being in a big country is
[Guest]: economies of scale in defense, okay? Because the most important existential threat was
[Guest]: just being run over and invaded. And so being large is the geometry of defense is that if
[Guest]: your population is uniformly distributed, then the number of people increases with the
[Guest]: square of the radius, but the circumference to be defended is increasing linearly with
[Guest]: the radius, right? So population per unit of border to be defended is actually higher,
[Guest]: the bigger you are, okay? So, and that is why historically, like, you know, countries
[Guest]: try to expand partly to protect the core, right? Because you would have a periphery
[Guest]: and then there would be the core that would be a productive core. So that was one of the
[Guest]: biggest historical advantages of size, okay? Now, there is a related advantage of size,
[Guest]: which is that along with the scale of investing in military comes other spillovers to civilian
[Guest]: life, okay? So you build roads partly to mobilize troops from one part to the other, and that
[Guest]: also has economic spillovers, and that logic applies even today, right? So the best kind
[Guest]: of, you know, so the internet came from DARPA's investments in defense communications, right?
[Guest]: Boeing came from investments in military aviation, okay? So a lot of the technological advances
[Guest]: of society have also happened in the context of military innovation. And that is also benefited
[Guest]: by scale. It's fundamentally a scale game, right? That because the more people you have,
[Guest]: the more tax revenue you have, and that allows you to cover the fixed costs of these kind
[Guest]: of big expenses. Now, there's a third advantage of size, right, which is the size of your
[Guest]: domestic market, okay? So in worlds where you have trade barriers across countries,
[Guest]: the size of the market also helps in terms of enabling high fixed cost industries, okay?
[Guest]: So and just the larger markets are good in many ways. There's a fourth advantage, which
[Guest]: is better spatial insurance, okay? So something goes wrong in one part of the country, you
[Guest]: have an earthquake, you have a flood, you have something, and now you have two mechanisms
[Guest]: of kind of providing insurance against these natural disasters, right? The first is you
[Guest]: have tax revenue from other parts of the country that can be used to kind of compensate and
[Guest]: rebuild the places that are hurt. And the even more important channel is migration,
[Guest]: okay? That people can just move out of the afflicted area and kind of make their lives
[Guest]: in other parts of the country, right? So and then there's a fifth point, which is fifth
[Guest]: advantage of size, which is it becomes easier to kind of manage spillovers across jurisdictions,
[Guest]: okay? So I think, say, rivers are a great example, that if rivers flow through multiple
[Guest]: countries, then figuring out the public goods aspects of that is harder. Now, it's not easy
[Guest]: even within a country as we see in the interstate river disputes, but in principle, you kind
[Guest]: of have structures that allow you to negotiate these areas of policy where there are spillovers,
[Guest]: okay? So there's many, many, many advantages of being big, okay? So but then the question
[Guest]: is why are we not like infinitely sized? And that's because there are also enormous costs
[Guest]: of being big, okay? So the two big costs of being big, see, the biggest cost of size is
[Guest]: that you have to accommodate greater diversity in people's preferences, right? And as you
[Guest]: get bigger and bigger and bigger, if you have, again, on a scale of zero to 100, right? If
[Guest]: you increase your people, then your policy has to be somewhere in the middle, right?
[Guest]: So the bigger you are, the more you have people whose policy preferences are really far away
[Guest]: away, right? I mean, from the policies that are being chosen. And at some point, like,
[Guest]: you know, people want to secede, because they would rather have kind of the autonomy to
[Guest]: craft their own policies as they see make sense for them, as opposed to being tied to
[Guest]: this big core, okay? So the first big problem is how do you accommodate diversity in policy
[Guest]: preferences with like a single set of policies? And the second challenge of size is just how
[Guest]: much more unwieldy governance becomes because of the layers between the people and the rulers,
[Guest]: right? And so if, if you have to go through six levels versus two levels, the government
[Guest]: is just much less responsive, right? I mean, when you become too big, okay, so, so those
[Guest]: are the two fundamental costs of size, right? And so the over time in history, the optimal
[Guest]: size of nations, so, you know, countries have expanded, right? I mean, at times a strong
[Guest]: emperor strong thing, and then they've receded as you overextend and as kind of typically
[Guest]: populations in the fringe of the country, like, I mean, would rather be on their own,
[Guest]: because you've typically had a core. And if you see, say, Russia, Ukraine, today, it's
[Guest]: exactly like, I mean, a manifestation of that, right? I mean, so, you know, historically,
[Guest]: Tsarist Russia would expand, like, I mean, and kind of bring more areas under kind of
[Guest]: core Russian control, there was a certain element of coercion, a certain element of,
[Guest]: you know, migration. But, you know, there is also costs, which the peripheral republics
[Guest]: were bearing by kind of, you know, having to put up with Russian policies. And when
[Guest]: 91 happens, people, you know, prefer to break up. Okay, so then that's kind of this basic
[Guest]: tension that's playing out. So the question then is that, so the beauty of federalism,
[Guest]: right, I mean, is that the, when you want to then think about what is the optimal size
[Guest]: of a country, right, federalism, when done well, is a very, very powerful kind of solution,
[Guest]: because what it does is, if you abstract from the politics, and just focus on the efficiency
[Guest]: aspects of government for a moment, right, that federalism done right, is basically saying,
[Guest]: let's put the functions of government that benefit from economies of scale at the level
[Guest]: of a national government that has a much larger scale. And let's put the functions that need
[Guest]: to better accommodate diversity of preferences at, say, a state level. And let's put functions
[Guest]: that require responsiveness, right, I mean, an immediate acting on information at the
[Guest]: local level, right? I mean, and so, so the core idea of federalism is that let's get
[Guest]: the benefit of, best of both worlds, right, get the benefit of size by kind of having
[Guest]: size where it really matters, right? So size matters for defence, size matters for international
[Guest]: relations, size matters, you know, for all kinds of actions that require economies of
[Guest]: scale, but let's kind of move the governance much lower in areas where size is a disadvantage,
[Guest]: okay? So that is kind of the conceptual core of federalism, right? Now, I think, so in
[Guest]: the Indian case, the federalism, I mean, so, you know, and the Indian case is a particularly
[Guest]: good example, right, of how these federal principles have, I think, in my view, and
[Guest]: other experts really contributed to the preservation of the Union, right? Because, you know, one
[Guest]: of the big concerns at the time of independence was, you know, whether it was the British
[Guest]: or the Americans, everybody was like, listen, you know, the Punjabi in East Punjab has more
[Guest]: in common with the Punjabi in West Punjab than with the Tamilian, and they couldn't
[Guest]: stay together, right? Like, having seen partition, you know, the sense was that this is not a
[Guest]: country that is going to be together, it's just too unwieldy and too diverse, okay? Like,
[Guest]: you know, so, but I think, and again, there was an old debate at the time where, you know,
[Guest]: Gandhi was always in favour of more linguistic states, but Nehru and Ambedkar were concerned
[Guest]: about the Balkanisation and the risk of further linguistic regional Balkanisation. But I think
[Guest]: the 56th reorganisation of states by language was a really important decision that has helped
[Guest]: preserve the Indian Union, and it's because it has kind of allowed the area where people
[Guest]: have kind of diversity and preferences, particularly culture, language, right? I mean, that it's
[Guest]: allowed that to be preserved at the state level, right? Like, I mean, while delegating
[Guest]: to the Union government, right, the functions where there are true economies of scale, okay?
[Guest]: So, I think, so, federalism, when done well, can really help by getting you the best of
[Guest]: all of these worlds, right? Now, the problem, of course, is it also comes with a whole bunch
[Guest]: of additional challenges, right? So, it comes with basic challenges of who's in charge,
[Guest]: okay? Like, you know, who has the final say on a particular set of decisions, okay? It
[Guest]: has additional complications in terms of coordination and kind of passing the buck and getting credit.
[Guest]: So, everybody at different levels wants credit when things go right, they want to pass the
[Guest]: buck when things go wrong. And there is also this generic kind of push towards over-centralisation,
[Guest]: right? I mean, which is a constant risk in federal systems. But I think, you know, just
[Guest]: taking a step back about how to think about federalism, I think the key insight in what
[Guest]: I'm telling you is that we often think about kind of governments as hierarchies, right?
[Guest]: I mean, we say, oh, there's a, the central government is the highest, and then there's
[Guest]: the state government, and then there's the local government. But thinking about governments
[Guest]: as hierarchies is fundamentally, I think, incorrect, right? Rather, you should be thinking
[Guest]: about these governments in terms of functions and not hierarchies. There are some functions
[Guest]: that naturally are best done at the central government level, some best done at the state,
[Guest]: and some best done at the local. And frankly, from the perspective of the citizen, you know,
[Guest]: the decisions and effectiveness of the local government matter much, much more, right?
[Guest]: I mean, are my lights, are my streets, is the drains, are the drains being cleaned,
[Guest]: is the garbage being collected, are the streetlights working, are the teachers showing up? And
[Guest]: these are all kind of local government functions, because they depend on acting on local information,
[Guest]: and kind of reducing the time lag between kind of an issue being identified and it being
[Guest]: solved, right? So, and, you know, and we can talk a little bit more about this about now,
[Guest]: see, the Constitution tries to kind of provide some clarity on what function should sit at
[Guest]: what level by segregating things at the sectoral level, okay, saying that some sectors are
[Guest]: in the state list, some are in the central list, or some are in the concurrent list.
[Guest]: But I think, and we can talk more about, you know, the COVID example and other things that
[Guest]: in some ways we are better off by thinking in terms of function as opposed to sector,
[Guest]: right? So, functions that require economies of scale are best done at the national level.
[Guest]: Functions that require coordination and that need to kind of accommodate migration and
[Guest]: people moving across are better done at the national level. Functions that need to respond
[Guest]: to local variation are better done, like, you know, at a lower level. So anyway, so
[Guest]: that's, I think, like, you know, a high-level conceptual, you know, taxonomy of federalism,
[Guest]: so to speak. And then, you know, we can talk more about, you know, tensions as well as
[Guest]: the Indian experience.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, that's fascinating. And what I also sort of liked about your chapter was a historical
[Amit Varma]: perspective you bring to this, like when you talk about Europe and China in the 15th century,
[Amit Varma]: and you know, looking at the start of the 15th century, you would imagine, imagine that
[Amit Varma]: China will do much better. And, you know, they will, all the technological progress
[Amit Varma]: will happen there, and the innovation will happen there, and so on and so on, so forth.
[Amit Varma]: But it's actually Europe, because China is too centralized, information takes too long
[Amit Varma]: to kind of pass, like those giant dinosaurs, which became extinct, I don't know why I thought
[Amit Varma]: of that. And by the way, a Velociraptor, I think it's called, you know, Spielberg created
[Amit Varma]: a WhatsApp narrative about it, actually, it's the size of a turkey. So just a small aside,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you could have a pet Velociraptor, if you lived in those days, if it allowed
[Amit Varma]: you, I think in that particular case, consent would be important. But again, the example
[Amit Varma]: of Europe and China in the 15th century, and why Europe did so well, because it's basically
[Amit Varma]: is perforce decentralized, it's different states, but people are moving back and forth,
[Amit Varma]: innovation is moving back and forth, ideas are moving back and forth, they're competing
[Amit Varma]: for labor, they're competing for capital, all of that is happening, it's almost like
[Amit Varma]: a perfect environment. Now, you know, when you think of both the benefits of many, many
[Amit Varma]: people, the economies of scale, and also the importance of local governance, so you know,
[Amit Varma]: you don't have sort of sclerosis setting in, it makes complete sense that, you know, national
[Amit Varma]: defense, you know, foreign affairs, that's best left to the center, and who's going to
[Amit Varma]: clean my Nalla outside, that's best, you know, left at a local level. And indeed, India was,
[Amit Varma]: you know, designed, as you point out, at a federal structure across five tiers, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you had national government, state governments, district, block, and local body levels, right.
[Amit Varma]: And this is in conception, this sounds absolutely brilliant. But the way our state was really
[Amit Varma]: designed by our founders had a bias towards centralization, and not enough power, not
[Amit Varma]: enough money went all the way down the line. And we, you know, suffer with that today.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me about the reasons for this bias of centralization, because, you know, in hindsight,
[Amit Varma]: it's, of course, easy to pass judgment. But, you know, sitting there, in Delhi, as a country
[Amit Varma]: is collapsing around you, I can totally understand that thing that let's keep it together, you
[Amit Varma]: know, the center must hold, as it were, you know, so you centralize power and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But the consequences of that, you know, you have 50, 70, 100 years down the line for all,
[Amit Varma]: you know. So tell me a bit about how the state actually evolved. These are the good intentions,
[Amit Varma]: federal karenge, state, you know, and again, states organized by language is also great.
[Amit Varma]: Where did it go wrong?
[Guest]: Yes, I think, so let's first kind of get some facts, right, to understand just how overcentralized
[Guest]: India is, right? I mean, so, see, one measure of just how overcentralized India is, is,
[Guest]: if you look at the number of times a state government has been dismissed, okay, a democratically
[Guest]: elected state government, right, I mean, has just been summarily dismissed by the central
[Guest]: government, or a weaker variant of that, which is the chief minister is just replaced, okay,
[Guest]: by campaign, because, and that happens even today, though, 356 has gone down. Okay, so
[Guest]: I think I have a stat in the book that says that I think between 1960 and 2000, there's
[Guest]: a there's a window there, that, you know, there's, we document over 80 cases of either
[Guest]: Article 356, or chief ministers being replaced. And so this was really
[Guest]: 83 times.
[Guest]: 83 times, right? Like, you know, I can't remember the exact dates. I think it was 1960 to 2010.
[Guest]: 50 to 90.
[Guest]: 50 to 90. Oh, just 90. Okay, not even, I thought it went to 2010. But anyway, like, you know,
[Guest]: I think, regardless, there's a very, very, very large number of cases where local democratic
[Guest]: kind of decision making as represented in the elected government has completely been
[Guest]: countermanded by the centre. Okay, now, Article 356 was meant to be used in the most egregious
[Guest]: cases of complete breakdown of law and order, like, you know, and, and a lot of those powers.
[Guest]: In fact, I can't remember which one of you guys said this, right? But a lot of because
[Guest]: the initial constitution, the laws in many ways reflected that of a colonial state, not
[Guest]: just a colonial state, but also a state designed for wartime. Okay, because a lot of these
[Guest]: discussions happening around the preparation for World War Two, that those things stayed
[Guest]: on to kind of give the government of India, kind of extreme powers to be used in emergencies.
[Guest]: But it got routinized, right? It got routinized to the point where states almost become became
[Guest]: subservient. So that was one part of overcentralization, at the political level, right? Then at the
[Guest]: financial level, at the policy level, one way to then think about how much control the
[Guest]: centre keeps is that, you know, it's both at the level of say, centrally sponsored schemes,
[Guest]: okay, so even though issues like health and education are supposed to be in the state
[Guest]: list, right, by kind of having a lot of financial power with the central government that gets
[Guest]: done through schemes, you're also effectively forcing states to kind of toe the line with
[Guest]: regard to these central guidelines, right? So we can talk a lot more about that as well
[Guest]: and get into details of how over-centralized things are and what the costs of those things
[Guest]: are. See, but I think it's important not just to blame the centre, right? The bigger culprit
[Guest]: in some ways are the state governments, right? Because they have not actually decentralised
[Guest]: any authority to local governments, okay? So, and Raja Chalaiya had this kind of wonderful
[Guest]: quote, he says, everybody wants decentralization up to their level, okay? Like, you know, so
[Guest]: nobody wants to give up power and this is true both politically and bureaucratically,
[Guest]: right? You know, nobody wants to spend the long climbing the greasy pole of power to
[Guest]: get to the top and then give it away, right? Like, you know, so there's all these tendencies
[Guest]: towards over-centralization. But I think if you take a step back into why we are the way
[Guest]: we are at the time of the Constitution, how we've evolved, there's really three reasons,
[Guest]: right? There are political reasons, there's economic reasons and frankly, the most important
[Guest]: may well be social reasons, which I think Madhav Khosla talks about in his book, right?
[Guest]: And the political reason was obvious, which is the single biggest concern of the framers
[Guest]: was that the country would fall apart, okay? So, you needed this idea of a strong centre
[Guest]: and you know, it was a union of states partly reflecting how British India was organized,
[Guest]: but partly reflecting the princely states and the fact that these were reasonably distinct
[Guest]: kind of entities. But the political unity of India was paramount in the minds of the
[Guest]: founders and so that's partly why you give the union government so much power. There's
[Guest]: also the economic aspect of the thinking that most of the development had to be state-led
[Guest]: and the resources that were needed for these investments were so large that it was felt
[Guest]: that only the government of India could actually mobilize those resources. So, there's an economic
[Guest]: reason and I think the most important one was actually the social reason, right? Which
[Guest]: is that the Indian state was not just trying to create a functioning order of, you know,
[Guest]: just law and order in a functioning state, but it was also trying to do social reform
[Guest]: in a big way, okay? And I think the biggest concern of decentralization of power was the
[Guest]: concern of local elite capture, right? And this was not just a theoretical concern. We'll
[Guest]: see this even now, right? I mean, in empirical work and social welfare programs and other
[Guest]: areas is that, you know, given just the deeply ingrained inequalities in Indian society,
[Guest]: the reformers who kind of, you know, were architects of the constitution just did not trust, right?
[Guest]: So, Ambedkar's famous quote about the village kind of being a den of prejudice, etc. So,
[Guest]: very practically, what does this mean? Practically, it means that, think about something like
[Guest]: education, okay? Now, in, say, the US or in most other high-income countries, education
[Guest]: is purely a local government function, okay? It's done at the local level and the logic
[Guest]: is that you accommodate preferences, there are certain standard curriculum, but local
[Guest]: bodies have a lot of power, okay? But in an Indian case, where the history of caste in
[Guest]: many ways was about denying education, right? I mean, to the underprivileged or denying
[Guest]: education to women, right? There was just this very real concern that local control
[Guest]: would mean that you would simply not educate the underprivileged folks. Now, it's a different
[Guest]: story that it didn't happen for other reasons, but the concern was that you cannot trust
[Guest]: local elites to kind of do the investments that will disturb the social order, but that
[Guest]: which are really important for social progress, okay? So, I think that was probably the biggest
[Guest]: reason for the over-centralisation. I mean, think about this, right? So, if you're a government
[Guest]: teacher who is recruited by the government and sent there to do a job, and again, panchayat
[Guest]: is this wonderful example, right, where you see these tensions playing out even today.
[Guest]: So, you see that episode of kind of, you know, so throughout the thing, you see that this
[Guest]: is reserved for women, but it's the Sarpanchpati who's doing the job, but you see that the
[Guest]: agent of the state is kind of meant to make sure that the laws of the state are being
[Guest]: followed against kind of the local pressures, and as usual, the end result will be somewhere
[Guest]: in the middle, right? So, you don't fully, the modernising state is meeting the traditional
[Guest]: society. Tradition doesn't give up immediately, and modernity also loses, but they meet somewhere
[Guest]: in the middle, right? So, you do get progress, and so I think these are the historical reasons
[Guest]: for why we are so over-centralised, and so again, it made sense at that time, but I think
[Guest]: part of the reason we need to re-imagine our possibilities today is that those kind of
[Guest]: founding moments were times of literacy rates of 120% at a time when you had, you know,
[Guest]: no cell phones, no way of getting information, no way of monitoring, no way of really knowing
[Guest]: what's going on, and so you over-centralised partly because you didn't trust, but, you
[Guest]: know, we are at a place where the optimal amount of decentralisation is almost certainly
[Guest]: much higher than, you know, what we've had so far.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and I'll read out that Ambedkar quote because I love it so much, where he said,
[Amit Varma]: quote, what is a village but a sink of localism, a den of ignorance, narrow-mindedness and
[Amit Varma]: communalism. Just a beautiful sentence, flows so well, and, you know, and that kind of gets
[Amit Varma]: me to thinking, and of course, you know, what Ambedkar is implicitly also nodding to is
[Amit Varma]: that notion of people as a good thing, of, you know, no such thing as overpopulation
[Amit Varma]: that I pointed out, that cities change incentives, that you enter those larger economic networks,
[Amit Varma]: your incentives change, and you can no longer afford to be ignorant, you can no longer afford
[Amit Varma]: to be so narrow-minded or prejudiced or whatever, and they're not magic bullets, but it changes
[Amit Varma]: a little bit for the better. Now, you know, it's easy to look back in hindsight and say
[Amit Varma]: that, oh, that was wrong, but at that moment, sitting in his position, it just seemed a
[Amit Varma]: completely plausible thing to do. The country is falling apart, you got to do something,
[Amit Varma]: social imperative, centralised power, you know, there is so much to be done in terms
[Amit Varma]: of building new industries, building infrastructure, centralised power, that's economic reason.
[Amit Varma]: And the social reason is that, look, the country is a den of such, you know, casteism, bigotry,
[Amit Varma]: all of this shit happening all over the place, and we elites in Delhi are not like that,
[Amit Varma]: we'll figure it out, we'll change it from the top down, centralised power, right? And
[Amit Varma]: the thing is, and I know it's possible to be too harsh and be judgmental about this
[Amit Varma]: third instinct, the way it worked out, because, you know, you couldn't change society from
[Amit Varma]: the top down. This was, of course, a classic, you know, Gandhi versus the other guy's argument
[Amit Varma]: where Gandhi Singh was, we got to change it from the bottom up, though Gandhi, of course,
[Amit Varma]: also romanticised villages, partly because he didn't spend too much time in them. But
[Amit Varma]: Gandhi Singh was, we'll change it from the bottom up, otherwise it won't happen. And
[Amit Varma]: these guys were like, no, no, top down. And top down has failed in every sense. All these
[Amit Varma]: problems are still with us, caste is still with us, we are still a misogynist society,
[Guest]: and so on and so forth. And of course, we don't know the counterfactual.
[Guest]: Exactly, right? So that's what I was going to say yes and no, right? I think because
[Guest]: see, the careful research that looks at, say, the impact of women's reservation in panchayat
[Guest]: elections, right, like, you know, actually shows that despite all of these limitations,
[Guest]: right, I mean, it has had not, again, worked is too strong a word, right? It has moved
[Guest]: things in the right direction, right? See, in the end, progress is only directional,
[Guest]: right? I mean, so you can always look at this glass half empty and say, kuch nahi hua, it
[Guest]: has failed. So I think, again, with all of these things, the binary of worked or not
[Guest]: worked, I don't think is that useful, right? I think it's useful to kind of then just break
[Guest]: apart the different components and go to first principles and say, so, what were we trying
[Guest]: to achieve here? Okay, and then to what extent has that succeeded or failed? And then look
[Guest]: at the empirical evidence where possible. And this is why, you know, I think as we get
[Guest]: into the, and I'll spend a little bit more time talking about the research, right, and
[Guest]: the evidence, which is again, you know, hopefully, the comparative advantage I bring to the show,
[Guest]: right, the things I say are actually based on or bringing together a bunch of academic
[Guest]: papers, you know, but this is a huge area of research, right, of looking at the impact
[Guest]: of decentralization, at the impact of different kinds of reforms, you know, whether it's legislative
[Guest]: reforms and representation, where you do find positive effects, right? So that is the modernizing
[Guest]: state that is top down, like, you know, left to themselves, villages are not going to elect
[Guest]: women as pradhans, right? So that is a top down imposition. But, you know, I think it
[Guest]: was Urvashi, I think, in the most recent episode, like, you know, I mean, who was saying that
[Guest]: these things are moving, okay, like, I mean, that these reservations or others have moved
[Guest]: things in the right direction. So, you know, I think that's one thing. But another case
[Guest]: for top down, frankly, and this is where the NREGA paper comes in, is that there is now
[Guest]: actually pretty strong evidence that, let's think about the design and delivery of welfare
[Guest]: programs, okay? So there's an element of this that's about targeting, about identifying
[Guest]: who is the poor, and there's an element about this that is delivery, okay? And is maybe
[Guest]: you can argue both ways, you can argue that local communities have more information as
[Guest]: to who is in fact, the most deprived, and therefore needs the support, right? So one
[Guest]: logic would be to say, you should give the local communities more control over a welfare
[Guest]: budget that they can allocate to who actually is the most needy. But the flip side is to
[Guest]: say that welfare for the poor usually affects the power structures like, you know, of the
[Guest]: current rich, and NREGA is a perfect example that was massively resisted by landlords,
[Guest]: okay? And so there is both the risk of elite capture, that these resources will be captured
[Guest]: by them, and the risk that, you know, they will simply not implement the program. And
[Guest]: so here the evidence now from multiple studies does suggest, right, that the top down approach
[Guest]: has worked better, okay, in terms of, so this is a very nice paper in Indonesia, that Ben
[Guest]: Olkin, Abhijit Banerjee and others have done, and I think that will soon be out in the American
[Guest]: Economic Review. But, you know, they basically look at a reform that went from distributing
[Guest]: rice by taking whole bags of rice to the local communities and saying you distribute it to
[Guest]: one that kind of identifies the poor and sends the money directly to them. And they basically
[Guest]: estimate that this reform dramatically improved the progressivity of the welfare by actually
[Guest]: finding more of the needy, right? So that's again a case where in the delivery of welfare
[Guest]: programs actually top down, technology enabled interventions may in fact work better than
[Guest]: the decentralized version. But there are other areas, like say school governance and service
[Guest]: delivery, where I think a decentralized model, particularly with regard to accountability
[Guest]: and things like attendance, right, I mean, may work better. But again, you can see the
[Guest]: tension, right? The tension, there are political tensions in federalism, but there's also administrative
[Guest]: tensions in federalism, right? Because the view towards a more centralized state for
[Guest]: say teachers and doctors is to say that a local village will never be able to attract
[Guest]: a highly qualified teacher or doctor. The only way they will ever get a qualified staff
[Guest]: member is if they are recruited through a civil service exam, and then you are posted
[Guest]: to that village, because otherwise the village is never going to get a qualified staff member.
[Guest]: But that comes at the cost of the fact that two problems. One is that this highly qualified
[Guest]: and highly paid person feels no social connection to the village, and therefore lives far away.
[Guest]: So a big part of the absence problem is that people are just not living in the communities,
[Guest]: right? Like I mean, they're traveling from in and out. And second is that they're not
[Guest]: embedded in the community. And so therefore, there's very little kind of accountability.
[Guest]: So again, you see the tension, right? I mean, do you want a more qualified person, but who's
[Guest]: not accountable and embedded? Or are you better off with a slightly less qualified person,
[Guest]: but who's from the community and held accountable there, right? So I think, so in all of these
[Guest]: cases, theoretically, you can argue it both ways, which is kind of why you then need the
[Guest]: empirical evidence to say what is happening. And this is, again, a very interesting case
[Guest]: in education, where, see, for example, there's this nice RCT that Abhijit and Esther and
[Guest]: others did in UP, and that paper is called Pitfalls of Participatory Development, where
[Guest]: they tried to activate village education committees, okay, which are supposed to do this oversight
[Guest]: of the teachers and local, and you know, they have some local control. And what they found
[Guest]: was most people who were on VCs didn't even know they were on the VCs. And, you know,
[Guest]: and even those who knew they were on basically were completely ineffective, because they
[Guest]: had very little authority, okay, on the teachers. Conversely, there was a study on school management
[Guest]: in Kenya that was also randomized. And what they find is a bit more nuanced, which is
[Guest]: that strengthening the school management committee has no effect on the performance of the regular
[Guest]: civil service teacher, but it does have a significant effect on the performance of the
[Guest]: locally hired contract teacher. And that's because the community controls the renewal
[Guest]: of the contract, but the community has no say over the regular teacher. So I think the
[Guest]: point again, is just to highlight that conceptually, you can argue these both ways. But you know,
[Guest]: evidence matters and details really, really matter.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and you've got plenty of nuance in your chapter. And you know, when you write about
[Amit Varma]: the key tensions, you've already mentioned a few of them, like there is a tension about
[Amit Varma]: who has a final say, then there are conflicts over fundamental values, where at the local
[Amit Varma]: level, you may have a different set of values. And at a central level, you could have a different
[Amit Varma]: set of values, a classic example being the US Civil War, which you give, or Ambedkar
[Amit Varma]: himself, when he's talking about the village correctly, as a, you know, a den of ignorance,
[Amit Varma]: is sort of talking about a similar conflict, which is there, you speak about the administrative
[Amit Varma]: and political tensions, risk of elite capture at the local level, you've spoken about that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the trade off between education and the local embeddedness, as you point out,
[Amit Varma]: that you know, locally, there may not be enough trained teachers. So if at a central level,
[Amit Varma]: you're sending your teachers to government schools, even if they don't show up there,
[Amit Varma]: but we discussed that in another episode. And another tension that you point out is
[Amit Varma]: a political tensions when different parties are in power at different levels and all of
[Amit Varma]: that. Now, I get all of this. And I also like as an approach, especially when we are getting
[Amit Varma]: inquiry done into this, we are getting empirical evidence, RCTs are being done, all these insights
[Amit Varma]: are coming up. I understand that in theory, we can just really modify it and figure out
[Amit Varma]: where you need a top down intervention and where it is best left locally. But here's
[Amit Varma]: the thing, in theory, we both agree that we need to be federal, federalism is good, you
[Amit Varma]: need local governance, you need to design the areas and say, okay, the centre does this,
[Amit Varma]: local governments do this. But at the same time, as you say, the three concerns that
[Amit Varma]: our founders had when they were effectively designing the state, you know, 75 years ago,
[Amit Varma]: you know, are completely valid that the centre may not have held, what the hell do you do,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and economically, at that time, the thinking would just have been, you know,
[Amit Varma]: top down and all of that. And, and Ambedkar's tensions were, of course, valid that listen,
[Amit Varma]: this whole country will descend into, you know, its worst values, if we if we just,
[Amit Varma]: you know, leave it to local forces. So here's my thought experiment for you, that let's
[Amit Varma]: say that with the knowledge that you have now, if you are sitting in Ambedkar's place,
[Amit Varma]: with context as it was then, how would you design it differently? Because it is not enough
[Amit Varma]: to say that let's design it in at x equilibrium, and then gradually we will tinker, tinker,
[Amit Varma]: tinker as we get data. It's not enough to say that because once you've set the equilibrium
[Amit Varma]: at x, you've set the incentives kind of in stone because nobody who has power is going
[Amit Varma]: to give it up to speak to your you know, the earlier quote of yours about how everybody
[Amit Varma]: wants to devolve power, but only up to them, they don't want to, you know, so a state,
[Amit Varma]: so a state government will say no, no, we need more power, local governance, but they
[Amit Varma]: won't give it to the districts and the districts won't give it to the blocks and so on and
[Amit Varma]: so forth. And therefore it just in terms of the political economy, nobody's going to give
[Amit Varma]: the power away. So it is easier said than done, that we will tinker things and we will
[Amit Varma]: smoothen the system as we go along. No, once you've set it, you've kind of set it in stone.
[Amit Varma]: So what are you sort of going for in this horrible thought experiment I've inflicted
[Amit Varma]: upon you?
[Guest]: Yeah, it's too much pressure, right? Like, you know, I think, so let me just say a couple
[Guest]: of other things, right? I mean, since you're talking about the founding moments, and I
[Guest]: want to connect back to this episode you did with Madhavan, like, you know, and I think
[Guest]: the other nice thing I've seen in the arc of your own episodes over the years is, you
[Guest]: know, how some of your, if I may say so, more black and white characterizations, right?
[Guest]: I mean, have become more nuanced, right? So your early version would just be, like, you
[Guest]: know, the US Constitution was so small, why do we have this huge thing? And it's a periodical
[Guest]: that gets in so much.
[Amit Varma]: I still feel that.
[Guest]: But, but I think what Madhavan rightly pointed out was that the US Constitution is an incredibly
[Guest]: conservative constitution that is written in many ways, codifying the power of a very
[Guest]: narrow landed educated elite, right? I mean, that wrote that constitution. So, and there
[Guest]: was no concept, really, of social justice, or any of issues of slavery or any of these
[Guest]: things, right? And so, and so there are two things, one, that constitution is small. So
[Guest]: for two reasons, really, see, one is going back to first principles of federalism, right?
[Guest]: I mean, that the US is what we call in political science, coming together federalism, right?
[Guest]: I mean, where the states were distinct units, and any power that is not given explicitly
[Guest]: to the central government sits with the states, okay? So, which is why that is what is called
[Guest]: coming together, you come together and give up a few powers. And the modern European Union
[Guest]: is a bit like that, right? I mean, that you're coming together and saying, I'm giving you
[Guest]: powers and currency, I'm giving you powers and defense, because there is economies of
[Guest]: scale, but anything I'm not giving you sits with me. Okay, so there is one part of that,
[Guest]: which reflects the fact that the US Constitution is short, simply because of that. But the
[Guest]: much bigger issue is that it is not trying to do any social reform. And you see the tension
[Guest]: then 100 years later, or 80 years later, when they're dealing with slavery, right? I mean,
[Guest]: is that it does take a federal government to come in with military force to actually
[Guest]: kind of abolish slavery. And that is still not enough, right? It takes, you know, many,
[Guest]: many years after that, you know, you need the Voting Rights Act in the 1960s to even
[Guest]: make sure that voting rights of minorities were respected, right? So, and that gives
[Guest]: you a sense of just how deeply entrenched these local power structures are, and how
[Guest]: it takes kind of, you know, not just ideational change at the level of constitutions and laws,
[Guest]: but the actual physical backing of force of that state, right? I mean, that comes and
[Guest]: enforces the rights of the most marginalized. Okay, so I think this challenge that we're
[Guest]: trying to both kind of govern with stability, because think about it, right? Any attempt
[Guest]: at social justice is fundamentally disruptive to a status quo. Okay, like, you know, so
[Guest]: you're trying to, and that is, I think, the magic of India, right? The magic of India
[Guest]: is that, and I think this was also in your episode with Urvashi, right? I mean, which
[Guest]: is how, despite all of the conflicts and fault lines we have, the society is still actually
[Guest]: remarkably stable, okay, in terms of not kind of, you know, exploding in conflagrations,
[Guest]: and it's a miracle, right? And so, the challenge of kind of the Indian state is that governance
[Guest]: and constitutions are fundamentally conservative, right? Because you want to preserve law and
[Guest]: order, you want to preserve certain things, but social reform is fundamentally disruptive,
[Guest]: right? And so, historically, social reform has happened with revolutions, right? Whether
[Guest]: it's the Russian revolution, the peasant revolutions in China. So, what is, again, magical about
[Guest]: the Indian experience is, like, how we have managed to kind of push the arc of the state
[Guest]: in progressive ways, right? I mean, that improves social justice, but within an arc of kind
[Guest]: of overall democratic constitutional systems and stability, right? So, you get, you know,
[Guest]: so anyway, so I think the, so therefore, coming back to how you would re-architect or re-write
[Guest]: certain aspects of the constitution today, based on what we know from the last 70 years.
[Guest]: See, it's not just what we know, right? It is the fact that today, education rates, literacy
[Guest]: rates are 75% compared to 15%, right? You know, smartphones and cell phones. So, why
[Guest]: do you not trust the local areas? So, the two reasons you don't decentralize is, one,
[Guest]: you think people are not capable, and second, like, you know, you don't have visibility,
[Guest]: okay? Now you have both, right? So, essentially, what I argue, in terms of the kind of reform
[Guest]: agenda that I think states should be doing, that deepen federalism, while at the same,
[Guest]: deepen federalism and local control, while at the same time, recognizing the importance
[Guest]: of checks and balances, right? Because the local communities left to themselves may very
[Guest]: often kind of undo some of these goals of justice and progressive kind of, you know,
[Guest]: both programs and policies. So, let's take a very concrete example of teachers, okay?
[Guest]: So, the logic of federalism would suggest that education should be locally managed.
[Guest]: The problem is that will the village guy appoint his crony as the teacher, like, you know,
[Guest]: and therefore, you get a poor teacher and who's not accountable, whatever, right? So,
[Guest]: how do you therefore build a modified architecture that builds both the strength of your current
[Guest]: systems of quality control, with the additional accountability, okay, that comes from local
[Guest]: control, okay? So, one of the things I talk about, so I have this whole section of nuanced
[Guest]: decentralization, right? So, it can't just be, I'm blindly going to send off everything,
[Guest]: but the flip side, the argument of the centralizer, who says, local level, local level, also needs
[Guest]: to be treated with a grain of salt, because there is a self-serving power preserving element
[Guest]: of that argument, okay? So, what a framework that I broadly talk about in the chapter,
[Guest]: when I talk about nuanced decentralization, is to imagine just in the case of teachers
[Guest]: the following, okay? That you can only be appointed as a teacher, if you have been empanelled
[Guest]: through a selection process, whereby you have to pass certain exams and show that you have
[Guest]: certain qualifications, okay? But being empanelled doesn't guarantee you a job, okay? So, today,
[Guest]: you get into the government system, you're basically guaranteed a job, okay? So, the
[Guest]: job is still held at the pleasure of the local community. And so, you know, if you don't
[Guest]: show up, if you're not effectively catering to the local community, they can say, nahi,
[Guest]: like, we don't want you, okay? So, they can just say, I don't want you, I want somebody
[Guest]: else, but they are constrained in finding people who are also empanelled, okay? So,
[Guest]: in a world where you have empanelled, say, more teachers than there are jobs, okay, you
[Guest]: have got both the quality control aspect of it and the local control aspect of it, right?
[Guest]: So, that's kind of an example of how you might want to architect certain things that has
[Guest]: both the benefits of a slightly higher level of kind of administration and oversight, but
[Guest]: also the strengths of local accountability and local control. And then there are more
[Guest]: radical versions of this, you know, which I talk about, which is a slightly more radical
[Guest]: version is you could take the entire budget for schools and say, because see, right now,
[Guest]: the government school salaries are so much higher, okay, than the private schools, right?
[Guest]: So, and part of the problem in the, why does the private school kind of do well? It's because
[Guest]: they're paying one-fourth the salaries and hiring two times or three times as many teachers.
[Guest]: And so, you have lesser multi-grade teaching, you have smaller groups, you have all of that,
[Guest]: right? So, there is nothing that prevents a public school from having those same efficiencies
[Guest]: if you were to say that I'm going to give the local body the entire budget of the school,
[Guest]: right? And the local body can choose to spend that money how they see fit. Now, of course,
[Guest]: you still have to worry about corruption, you still have to worry about a bunch of things.
[Guest]: And so, you will need certain things that says you can still only hire an empanel teacher,
[Guest]: but you have some flexibility in the wage setting. So, here is the budget for the salary.
[Guest]: Maybe the salary is made to 50% and the remaining 50% is allocated on a performance-based basis
[Guest]: or allocated to say, I want to attract a more qualified teacher. So, there are ways of kind
[Guest]: of taking the current budget and dramatically improving the efficiency and accountability
[Guest]: by increasing the stake of local communities, but at the same time, building some checks
[Guest]: and balances, right? I mean, to make sure that there is a trust but verify approach
[Guest]: to how we do this. And that's not an answer to how I would read out the constitution,
[Guest]: but that's kind of a very specific example, right? I mean, of saying how these principles
[Guest]: can be tweaked.
[Amit Varma]: Fair enough. No, you know, I have changed my mind a lot over the course of all the great
[Amit Varma]: conversations I've had with people who've given me so much insight, but this particular
[Amit Varma]: issue about the US Constitution is not one of them. I maintain that we would have been
[Amit Varma]: incredibly fortunate to have the US Constitution because it enshrined and protected individual
[Amit Varma]: rights, you know, and that's important. It protected free speech, you know, Umar Khalid
[Amit Varma]: and Siddique Kapun would not be in prison today if we had that constitution. Mohammad
[Amit Varma]: Zubair would not have been arrested if we had that constitution. So, it is something
[Amit Varma]: I feel strongly about protecting individual rights. As far as slavery is concerned, that's
[Amit Varma]: a social evil. If the elites of that time were to enshrine their values into the constitution,
[Amit Varma]: abolishing slavery wouldn't have been there anyway. And over time, as society changed,
[Amit Varma]: thankfully it went away. I would argue that our efforts at social justice didn't really
[Amit Varma]: work in the top down way. You know, we still have many of those problems that we had then.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, the whole quest for social justice in some ways became a bit of a political farce.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't necessarily mean that you leave it to the villages to reform themselves as
[Amit Varma]: Gandhiji might have hoped. I don't think that would have worked either. So, I don't have
[Amit Varma]: an answer for this. But I do see where sort of the limitations are. So, on this particular
[Amit Varma]: issue, I won't take a stand because I don't have any answers. But I see the problems of,
[Amit Varma]: you know, where the elites failed, I do see that.
[Guest]: No, but I think this connects us back all the way to state capacity, right? See, because
[Guest]: in a way, the story of India, right, is that because we are crafting our ideals of what
[Guest]: we want to do, right, at a time when, because, see, and this is, I think, partly in Alex
[Guest]: and Shruti's episode on, you know, on kind of the imitation, right, premature imitation,
[Guest]: right? See, the ideas of what kind of a modern democratic society should stand for, even
[Guest]: in 1947 and 50, are informed by what people are seeing in the West, right? So, the story
[Guest]: of India is always one of aspirations ahead of our capacity, right? I mean, so the problem
[Guest]: is not, again, what's in the aspirations, right? It is that we haven't had the capacity
[Guest]: to then actually follow up against that. So, one view is to say that, listen, you need
[Guest]: to put the aspirations there, even if you're not able to deliver, because that is a bit
[Guest]: of a North Pole and a guide star, not star, to where do we want to go? Okay, like, okay,
[Guest]: at least the laws aspire to this so that we can get inspired to get there. Okay, so that
[Guest]: is one framing. The converse framing of that is that when your aspirations are so far ahead
[Guest]: of your capacity to deliver, it actually breeds cynicism, like, you know, that we just say
[Guest]: all of these things and never do it, and then that creates kind of the trust deficits and
[Guest]: everything that we talk about. And so, I think that is, it is the core challenge, and why,
[Guest]: you know, when I talk about state capacity, I see these investments in state capacity
[Guest]: as the central, the core. When I think about India at 75, right, I think about, you know,
[Guest]: we are a miracle in many, many ways, right? There are just so many things to be proud
[Guest]: of, right? But if we want to focus our mind on what is it that we really need to get our
[Guest]: act together in the next 25 years, it is essentially building a state that is capable of meeting
[Guest]: the aspirations, right? I mean, in the Constitution, the law, and coming back to Fukuyama's scope
[Guest]: and strength, I agree. Some of this will also require reducing the scope of the state, right?
[Guest]: I mean, there's a basic mathematical truism that if I'm, you know, and in fact, I find
[Guest]: a very useful analogy to be with my own time management, right? I mean, so in a way, I'm
[Guest]: like the overcommitted state in terms of my time commitment, right? I mean, because I
[Guest]: have committed to more things than I have time for. So I am always kind of juggling,
[Guest]: I'm always kind of responding to what is most urgent, who's putting the most pressure on
[Guest]: me, and things that are important, but not urgent are getting neglected. So to bring
[Guest]: my life into kind of balance, it requires a combination of two things. One is becoming
[Guest]: more efficient and investing in capacity. But the other is also cutting down the things
[Guest]: I say yes to. Okay, so mechanically, you need both, right? I mean, and so that applies even
[Guest]: to the state. I mean, we are definitely overextended doing a bunch of things that we have no business
[Guest]: doing. So some of that has to come down. But I think where I want to push back not to you,
[Guest]: but some kind of some of the naive kind of discussions that happen out there to say,
[Guest]: look, that where the markets have taken over, the markets have done well. So let's kind
[Guest]: of unleash the markets in these areas. And that will also do well. And I think there
[Guest]: in the core functions of the state, right, I mean, that that is not going to work. So
[Guest]: you are going to have to kind of invest in core state capacity and apply that in these
[Guest]: six areas that I've talked about, right? I mean, so and the reason the federalism chapter
[Guest]: is kind of a theme rather than a sector is that the ideas in the federalism chapter then
[Guest]: apply across the sectors, correct? Which is how do you then kind of optimally re-architect
[Guest]: our governance across multiple layers, so that you really kind of give local communities
[Guest]: more of a stake and more of a control. So and maybe there's a chicken and egg problem,
[Guest]: right? The chicken and egg problem of decentralization is that people say we will not decentralize
[Guest]: because there is no capacity to actually do the work locally. Conversely, the capacity
[Guest]: is not built because you've never given them the money and the authority to kind of make
[Guest]: it worth developing the capacity, okay? So and in a way, if you look at even the arc
[Guest]: of Indian independence, the British in the early 20th century were like they can't govern
[Guest]: themselves, right? So which is why 1935 Government of India Act kind of having the provincial
[Guest]: governments showing that you can do some stuff then kind of builds your muscles along the
[Guest]: way to being able to govern yourself. So similarly, at the local government level, we're in this
[Guest]: chicken and egg today, where we say we won't decentralize because there's no capacity.
[Guest]: And conversely, people say, why bother when there's no capacity? And that's where I think,
[Guest]: you know, particularly in urban governance, right? I mean, where I agree with Ashwin and
[Guest]: others is that because you now have enough educated, highly competent people, in many
[Guest]: cases, more competent who are in the government, right? If you can find ways for greater civic
[Guest]: engagement in urban governance, right? I mean, then you're kind of both proving that the
[Guest]: community can handle its problems. And by doing that, you're also building a little
[Guest]: bit more of a political force, right? I mean, to actually ask for more devolution mean at
[Guest]: the local level, right? So and, and I think it's not an accident, of course, you know,
[Guest]: the jury's out on what Aam Aadmi Party will do in Punjab, right? But it's not an accident
[Guest]: that the chief minister who focuses the most in service delivery issues is the most empowered
[Guest]: mayor of India, right? Like Kirneen is, because he is basically governing Delhi. And therefore,
[Guest]: like Kirneen talks about service delivery issues. And you know, the more the more you
[Guest]: start kind of seeing organic political formations that focus exclusively on local service delivery
[Guest]: and governance, right? I mean, then you will kind of build a little bit of a bottom up
[Guest]: aspect to that. And, you know, power is never taken, right? Power is all power is never
[Guest]: given away, right? Power is taken, okay. And so it's just like, so there are people in
[Guest]: for decentralization advocates who think as who feel as strongly about this as democratization
[Guest]: itself, let's say, like, you know, democracy itself, elites never give up power, it happens
[Guest]: when people kind of demand the power that, you know, you you give away the vote. And
[Guest]: there are people who argue the same thing for decentralization. And going back to question,
[Guest]: nobody will willingly give up power, but it has to come up bottom up and saying, you know,
[Guest]: we will step up and do what it takes to govern ourselves, right? I mean, and having done
[Guest]: that, that creates the space over time for more and more decentralization. And, you know,
[Guest]: and sometimes the institutions will also help. I think this time, the Finance Commission
[Guest]: has explicitly kind of linked certain transfers to kind of the next level. Now, again, you
[Guest]: could argue that that's not democratic. But you know, it's it's one of the ways in which
[Guest]: things that we know are good, but that are politically not incentive compatible get done
[Guest]: is through these nonpartisan commissions that make recommendations that then get adopted.
[Amit Varma]: Wonderful. I'll push back a little bit at your pushing back of allegedly non-me. You
[Amit Varma]: know, in your book, you have this little bit about how, you know, some market proponents
[Amit Varma]: say that, you know, look at what markets have done in telecom and airlines.
[Amit Varma]: That is not you, by the way. I'm not pushing back on you. That's not you.
[Amit Varma]: No, because you know, that that is actually the classic example I use whenever I talk
[Amit Varma]: about the power of the market that, you know, I remember what phones were, you know, you
[Amit Varma]: had a 10 year waiting period for phones in the 1980s. Airlines were so expensive. I remember
[Amit Varma]: when you opened it up, how things changed because of market incentives. And so I use
[Amit Varma]: exactly those two sectors. And you kind of mentioned exactly those two sectors. But even
[Amit Varma]: if you're pushing back against someone who is allegedly non-me, it is still to be noted
[Amit Varma]: that you're pushing back against the straw man because I don't think anyone argues that
[Amit Varma]: the basic roles of the government should be supplanted by the market. Instead, the argument
[Amit Varma]: is and the kind of argument I would make in essential services like education, for example,
[Amit Varma]: is that I am not saying that you abolish government schools and only have private schools, right?
[Amit Varma]: Not at all. All I'm saying is that you and we've discussed this at length in our episode
[Amit Varma]: is that while you do what you do, allow private schools the chance to exist instead of putting
[Amit Varma]: so many impediments in their way, such as you can't have a for profit school. So you
[Amit Varma]: know, a lot of the budget private schools today to which, you know, slum dwellers send
[Amit Varma]: their children instead of to a free government school, thereby voting with their feet. A
[Amit Varma]: lot of those schools are illegal outside the law, outside the law can shut down any moment,
[Amit Varma]: so on and so forth. So all I'm saying is that allow society to solve its own problems. And
[Amit Varma]: the few things that a state should do well, again, going back to Fokuyama Singh about
[Amit Varma]: scope and strength, we need a strong state that does a few things well, not a weak state
[Amit Varma]: that does many things badly. What I would say is that in the things that a strong state
[Amit Varma]: should do, well, you know, by all means, a state should do that no one is making the,
[Amit Varma]: you know, argument that the market should do everything, but at least allow people to
[Guest]: solve their own problems. That's and I agree completely. And you know, that's why I have
[Guest]: this whole chapter in state and market, right? In fact, so, you know, this is the temptation
[Guest]: of going into other chapters, but I am going to, you know, read out one paragraph from
[Guest]: chapter 10, right? On kind of, you know, on basically this, you know, so I say this, right?
[Guest]: In ideological terms, my approach in the coming chapters is best characterized as being to
[Guest]: the center left in terms of goals and center right in terms of means, right? So my choice
[Guest]: of sectors is clearly influenced by the development and capabilities framework associated with
[Guest]: those who prioritize equity and justice, right? So whether it's education, health, all of
[Guest]: these things. Further, my focus on improving the capacity of public systems to deliver
[Guest]: better will also resonate with the center left. Yet, the ideas and themes I focus on
[Guest]: also reflect my views based on years of research and practice that delivering these goals at
[Guest]: scale, especially with our limited resource base, will require us to sharply improve accountability
[Guest]: efficiency and cost effectiveness within the government, pay careful attention to incentives
[Guest]: and design systems that better align the incentives of all stakeholders to deliver improved outcomes,
[Guest]: not simply assume that well-intentioned laws and higher budgets will translate into better
[Guest]: outcomes, and treat markets in the private sector as an ally in achieving social and
[Guest]: development goals. And these are views that are more commonly associated with the economic
[Guest]: right. Okay, so that's kind of, you know, where I come in on this. And so hopefully
[Guest]: there, I think we would agree very, very broadly.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, I, you know, you don't have to agree to agree with me to be brilliant, you're brilliant
[Amit Varma]: anyway, and I learned so much from you. But I would again push back at a little characterization
[Amit Varma]: here when you talk about these goals as center left goals, I think you should in good faith
[Amit Varma]: accept that they're everybody's goals. And the only argument is about means, right? That
[Amit Varma]: we want everyone to be educated, we want everyone to be healthy, how do we get there? And what
[Amit Varma]: the economic right would argue is that, you know, good intentions and the coercive power
[Amit Varma]: of the state won't get you there. We have all of history as testimony to that. And we
[Amit Varma]: have to unleash the power of markets and society to help itself. And at the same time, if you
[Amit Varma]: believe that, you know, good intentions alone, and you know, the power of the state will
[Amit Varma]: help solve it, go ahead, good luck, but don't stop us from solving our own problems. That's
[Guest]: kind of what I would say, you know, why I am in the constitution so much now.
[Guest]: And we agree. And we fully, fully agree.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah. No, let's, let's, let's get on to sort of, let's continue talking about federalism.
[Amit Varma]: You know, some of the stats that blew my mind, and this is something I should have known,
[Amit Varma]: this is something in a sense I knew, because I think when Iceland was doing well, in the
[Amit Varma]: last football World Cup, I said, Varsova has more people than them, you know, so this is
[Amit Varma]: something I should have known. But I just want to read these statistics out because
[Amit Varma]: it you realize the scale of the problem and how stupid this kind of our kind of centralization
[Amit Varma]: is, where at one point, you write, the 15 largest Indian states by population would
[Amit Varma]: all rank in the top 42 countries in the world by population or 20% of the most populous
[Amit Varma]: countries in the world, and you've got a chart also, right. So it's not just UP, the 15 largest
[Amit Varma]: Indian states would be among the top 40 countries in the world. Simply put governing an Indian
[Amit Varma]: state is best sort of as the equivalent of running a medium to large country, stop quote,
[Amit Varma]: and then you go on to say, quote, Indian districts and sub districts are also large India has
[Amit Varma]: over 700 districts, average population under 2 million per district, around 7000 sub districts
[Amit Varma]: slash blocks, with an average population of 200,000 each, and so on and so forth. And
[Amit Varma]: then at the end by saying, for perspective, the average district in India has more people
[Amit Varma]: than 85 countries, or 36% of the countries in the world. So the average district in India
[Amit Varma]: is bigger than 85 countries in the world, like my god, that's, that's sort of mind blowing.
[Amit Varma]: Now, if one can't quantify this, but what has been sort of like, first before before
[Amit Varma]: I ask you questions about what has been the sort of the cost of being centralized all
[Amit Varma]: this time, if I am to ask you to sort of lay out how deep is the dysfunction between power
[Amit Varma]: and accountability in this kind of a system, like I had an episode with Shruti Rajagopalan
[Amit Varma]: on urban governance, and she pointed out that, listen, the guy you're voting for has no power
[Amit Varma]: to change your life. And the guy who has power to change your life, your votes don't matter
[Amit Varma]: to him, in a context of Maharashtra, as it were, but I think it would be kind of true
[Amit Varma]: a lot. So give me a better sense of this structure overall, how powerful is a centre, how powerful
[Amit Varma]: are the states, how powerful are districts, and so on and so forth. Like both of us agree
[Amit Varma]: that, for example, you know, reserving those panchayat head seats for women did have an
[Amit Varma]: impact over a period of time, right? Even if people can argue net positive, net negative,
[Amit Varma]: I tend to think net positive, but they did have an impact, right, at the very local level.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, it's true that there's almost no power at the very local level, that
[Amit Varma]: you know, the centre will stop anything going to the state, the state will stop anything
[Amit Varma]: going further down. You point out that, you know, the percentage of money, for example,
[Amit Varma]: that the states get is, I think, two thirds of all revenues are spent by the, all money
[Guest]: is spent by the centre, right?
[Guest]: So, sorry, expenditure is more in the states than the centre. But see, essentially, first
[Guest]: principle, that's why, you know, some of this is overlaps with chapter seven on revenue
[Guest]: as well, right? So first principles of public finance say that a lot, it makes sense to
[Guest]: collect revenue at a higher level, okay, because particularly, because there's economies of
[Guest]: scale and tax administration, you don't want to raise to the bottom in certain aspects
[Guest]: like corporate taxes, customs and stuff are obviously kind of done. So, and in a way,
[Guest]: so essentially, revenue, by first principles, it does make more sense that the Government
[Guest]: of India collects more. But expenditure, by first principles, it makes more sense that
[Guest]: more of it happens at the state level, because that's, they are closer to the delivery. And
[Guest]: the gap between that is usually that's what is fulfilled by the Finance Commission, right?
[Guest]: Because the Finance Commission takes kind of the divisible pool of revenues, and then
[Guest]: through a formula that has components of horizontal and vertical kind of, you know, the delegation,
[Guest]: basically allocates money to states. And so the gap comes is fulfilled in two ways. One
[Guest]: is money that comes to the Finance Commission that is broadly untied. And second is money
[Guest]: that comes through the centrally sponsored schemes, which is also money coming from the
[Guest]: centre, but that is more tied, right, into specific things. So anyway, so overall, most
[Guest]: of the expenditure close to 60% of spending happens at the state level, but about 60%
[Guest]: of the revenue is collected at the national level.
[Amit Varma]: Right. And give me a give me sort of a breakdown of the system in terms of what is a power
[Amit Varma]: breakdown and what should it be? And also, what have sort of been some of the consequences
[Amit Varma]: of this? And obviously, those will be broader brush, because you can't really quantify anything.
[Guest]: Yeah, I think, to be honest, the biggest source of discrepancy, frankly, see, if you look
[Guest]: at the design, by first principles, the centre and the state are the levels where you're
[Guest]: supposed to design policies and programs and the district and lower level are where you're
[Guest]: supposed to implement them. Okay, so, and that's broadly how powers are allocated. Okay,
[Guest]: so when we say that there isn't much power at the local level, I think in practice, it
[Guest]: really translates into two things. Okay, one is that there is very, very little or frankly
[Guest]: zero discretionary budget, okay, that is there at the local level. So if you're a local principal
[Guest]: or even a district education officer, okay, your discretionary budget, in terms of funding
[Guest]: programs or interventions that may make sense are basically zero. Okay, so that is one margin
[Guest]: where local levels have very little power. The second margin in and this is more true
[Guest]: kind of, you know, at the village and at the facility level, is you have basically no power
[Guest]: over the government employees, right? I mean, so because when we say that the bulk of the
[Guest]: budget, so when I talk about the decentralization in China, that why does China have so China
[Guest]: has about 50% of total public expenditure happens at the local government level. In
[Guest]: India, that's only 3%. Okay, so that gives you a sense of how big this queue is. Okay,
[Guest]: but the biggest driver of that is that almost all service delivery employees, okay, whether
[Guest]: it's teachers or doctors, or, you know, street cleaners or anybody is employed at the local
[Guest]: government. Okay, and so that's where that delta comes in. So when we say, so it is not
[Guest]: that the Indian villages do not get the resources, but because the bulk of the resources is tied
[Guest]: to the salary cost of the employee, right, I mean, on whom you have zero kind of accountability,
[Guest]: that's where the fundamental mismatch happens. Correct. So I think the tweaks we would want
[Guest]: to make are relatively simple, okay, which is to say, if local governments have a lot
[Guest]: more authority on kind of the staffing, okay, and, and that's where that nuanced decentralization
[Guest]: I talked about, right, mean matters, which is saying, you have an empanelled list of
[Guest]: people who kind of satisfy a certain set of technical criteria for having this government
[Guest]: job, but that doesn't guarantee you the actual employment that is still done at the local
[Guest]: government level. So that would be one meaningful way of empowering them. Now, a more radical
[Guest]: way of empowering them would be to transfer the entire budget, okay, to the local government
[Guest]: and saying, this is the budget per child, and you know, you have the freedom to spend.
[Guest]: And then you still want accountability in terms of, you know, so what you want, and
[Guest]: this goes back to a principle I talk about a lot throughout the book, right, of autonomy
[Guest]: and process and accountability for outcomes, okay, which is to say that you have the budget,
[Guest]: but we will kind of have independent measurement of certain outcomes. And then, you know, you
[Guest]: can think about fiscal rules that say, here is a certain amount that's equal for every
[Guest]: child. So I talk about this in the expenditure chapter, right, where I talk about a 70-20-10
[Guest]: principle of allocation of public funds, which is 70% based on an equality principle, where
[Guest]: every child or every citizen gets the same amount, about 20% based on an equity principle,
[Guest]: where you say, here are the places that are the kind of most underprivileged and need
[Guest]: gap kind of financing, and the 10% based on an effectiveness principle that, you know,
[Guest]: the places that are actually delivering outcomes, so you put a little bit of skin in the game,
[Guest]: like, you know, for people to be oriented towards outcomes. So I think these would be,
[Guest]: and this is why, again, the foundation of so many of the reform ideas I have is better
[Guest]: data, right? And that's why that chapter four, see, these are ideas about performance-based
[Guest]: funding, which I have shared in the past, even with the Finance Commission, right? And
[Guest]: in fact, Dr. Y. V. Reddy, I remember talking to him about this back in the day, he said,
[Guest]: you know, Karthik, all these ideas make a lot of sense, but I don't have the data to
[Guest]: implement them. Okay, so you need the data, which is again, why that's a foundational
[Guest]: investment in being able to do reforms along a whole bunch of these lines. But yes, so
[Guest]: I think, when we say that the state has most of the power, it reflects the fact that the
[Guest]: employees are state government employees, okay, and it reflects the fact that that's
[Guest]: where the bulk of the cost is going. And because the local communities have very little oversight
[Guest]: and accountability on the employees, that's kind of where the core lack of decentralization
[Guest]: hits you. And the second place where it hits you is the complete lack of discretionary
[Guest]: budgets. Okay, so if you have some ideas and want to do something, you just don't have
[Guest]: the resources to do it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I like the 70-20-10 formulation. And just in terms of local knowledge and local
[Amit Varma]: priorities, I don't know if you seem to have heard every episode of mine. Did you hear
[Amit Varma]: the one with Abhinandan Sekhi?
[Amit Varma]: Yes, the one about the movie theater. They wanted the movie theater. I passed your pop
[Amit Varma]: quiz.
[Amit Varma]: You passed my test. You passed. Yeah, I will not remember as many things from my episodes
[Amit Varma]: as you do. But just for the benefit of listeners who haven't heard that great episode, the
[Amit Varma]: funda is that, you know, Abhinandan and his team were at this northeast village and they
[Amit Varma]: asked the villagers, you know, where would you like to kind of your money spend the most?
[Amit Varma]: And they said, we want a movie theater. Now, this is completely counterintuitive. There
[Amit Varma]: are people in a village, they could ask for a dispensary, they could ask for a road, they
[Amit Varma]: could ask for whatever, why do they want a movie theater? And the answer was that because
[Amit Varma]: there was no entertainment in the village, all the kids would go to, you know, near whatever
[Amit Varma]: the nearby town was to watch movies. And the roads were bad and unsafe and all of that
[Amit Varma]: and they would have accidents and the death rate was high. So it was, you had to risk
[Amit Varma]: your life to watch a film. And if it was a Bollywood film, you probably deserve to risk
[Amit Varma]: your life for it. But, and that was the thing. And this is local knowledge. This is not something
[Amit Varma]: a central planner could ever have worked out. And similarly, in every sort of local area,
[Amit Varma]: you might have different priorities, which only local people would know. And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: my instinct here would be to figure out what is the most local base of unit you can get
[Amit Varma]: to and give them as much money as possible and let them make the decisions and then let
[Amit Varma]: these units, whether they are blocks or districts or whatever, compete with each other, much
[Amit Varma]: as we would say, states should compete with each other, like in the US to a certain extent
[Amit Varma]: they do in terms of these are the taxation laws. And, you know, these are all the different
[Amit Varma]: kind of laws that we have available. This is the ecosystem we are building. You compete
[Amit Varma]: with each other and then people vote with their feet, which they can because, you know,
[Amit Varma]: they're moving across states, not across countries. And I think that's a great way, that's a healthy
[Amit Varma]: competition. And I would have thought that that's one of the fundamental principles of
[Amit Varma]: federalism, that you allow people to compete at that kind of policy level.
[Guest]: So, sorry, I think, you know, so you're absolutely right. There's a slight additional nuance
[Guest]: to that, right? I mean, so what you're kind of, so there is an element of competition,
[Guest]: right? I mean, which happens, say, at the state level and kind of attracting people,
[Guest]: investments and all of that stuff. But there is also a very powerful element here of accommodating
[Guest]: divergence in people's preferences. OK, so the original idea of what's called tibu sorting,
[Guest]: so Charles, t-i-e-b-o-u-t. So some people actually pronounce it to tibout, but my first
[Guest]: teacher pronounced him, so Caroline Huxby calls him tibu. But the core idea of tibu
[Guest]: sorting is that, that what is government? OK, if you take a step back, what is government
[Guest]: is, government is meant to be a vehicle for expressing our collective desires on kind
[Guest]: of taxation and a bundle of public goods, correct? So, and different people will have
[Guest]: different preferences, right? Some would say, OK, I'm happy to pay a 40% tax if the government
[Guest]: is going to give me a whole bunch of these things. Others might say, no, I only want
[Guest]: 10% tax. You just provide law and order and the rest will take care of. OK, now, the logic
[Guest]: of the tibu sorting is that by allowing local jurisdictions to set their own bundles of
[Guest]: taxation and public goods, you are also, it's not just competition, but you're accommodating
[Guest]: diversity and preferences, right? Like, you know, by giving people a chance to not saying
[Guest]: this is better than that on average, this is better for me. I want this and I want that.
[Guest]: But I think, frankly, in India, we're very, very, very far from that. And see, the problem
[Guest]: is to make that model work, you need a model of revenue collection that is differentiated
[Guest]: by space, OK? And because most of our revenue collection is not differentiated by space,
[Guest]: right? Because whether it's income tax or whether it's GST, these are all kind of doesn't
[Guest]: matter where you are right now. But that kind of gets me to one, I think, very, very important
[Guest]: area of reform, which I think is key to strengthen local governments, and that is strengthening
[Guest]: property taxes. OK, so this will show up again in Chapter 7, right, when I talk about revenue.
[Guest]: Because the reason property taxes are so important is it's important for multiple reasons, right?
[Guest]: See, I think one of the key problems in taxation in India is that the fiscal compact between
[Guest]: the taxpayer and the government is broken, OK, which is the fiscal compact is I pay taxes
[Guest]: and expect services in return. But where we are today is I pay taxes, the services are
[Guest]: so bad, I go to the private sector. So therefore, I'm double paying both the taxes and paying
[Guest]: out of my pocket. And therefore, tax evasion is almost kind of morally justified, right?
[Guest]: I mean, that people kind of justify their mind, OK, why am I paying taxes? OK, so there
[Guest]: is a lot of evidence on what's called tax morale, OK, which is what kind of increases
[Guest]: voluntary tax compliance. And a big part of tax morale is people kind of two things. One
[Guest]: is seeing a visible link between your taxation and the services you're receiving. And second
[Guest]: is having a say in how those taxes are spent. OK, and so therefore, if you want to raise
[Guest]: taxes in India, like I get very nervous. In fact, I say this very clearly, there's a reason
[Guest]: my revenue chapter comes after expenditure, because, you know, a government that spends
[Guest]: money badly loses moral authority to collect taxes. OK, so that's why I first want to improve
[Guest]: efficiency of expenditure before you raise more taxes. But that being said, you know,
[Guest]: there is no question we need better urban public infrastructure, we need a whole bunch,
[Guest]: we need the revenue for these things. OK, but the value of more property taxes, it has
[Guest]: many, many benefits, right? So the first is that actually, if done well, you can create
[Guest]: a self-sustaining virtuous cycle, right, whereby if the tax revenue is providing local public
[Guest]: goods, right, of a certain quality, then that can actually improve the local housing prices
[Guest]: to capitalise the quality of the public goods, which then increases that and increases the
[Guest]: tax revenue, right? So you get into a virtuous cycle of public good provision, because again,
[Guest]: what is the core economics of public finance? The core economics is that if I take taxpayer
[Guest]: money, I should spend it on things that have a higher ROI, right, I mean, than the money
[Guest]: I'm spending. And if it has a higher ROI, say, in the case of public goods, that higher
[Guest]: return on investment is capitalised in the property prices. So there's a lot of research
[Guest]: in the US, for example, showing how if you invest in better schools, right, I mean, through
[Guest]: issuing school bonds, then that kind of is reflected in the property prices that then
[Guest]: kind of more than pays for the bond. Okay, so that's why it's a positive ROI investment.
[Guest]: Now coming therefore, to how do you, so that's one reason for why I think property taxes
[Guest]: make more sense, because you create a bit of a virtuous cycle between kind of local
[Guest]: service delivery and kind of the underlying value of the asset. The second reason is politically,
[Guest]: it is kind of, there's a tighter link between the tax and the services, because it's not
[Guest]: going into very, very far away government of India, or even the state government, it's
[Guest]: going to your local government. And therefore, you see how it comes back to you in terms
[Guest]: of services. And the third is that it also kind of helps with the federalism point, which
[Guest]: is that the key challenge today for local government is local government has zero or
[Guest]: very little revenue raising capacity, right. So they're dependent on the goodwill and the
[Guest]: transfers that come from higher levels of government. But the, and that's why at least
[Guest]: in urban areas, right, I mean, if you're able to strengthen kind of property taxation, that
[Guest]: gives you a virtuous cycle of also strengthening federalism. Because, see, one of the reasons
[Guest]: state governments are not bothered so much about property taxes is they see this as humko
[Guest]: kya fayada, right? I actually talked to an advisor to chief minister said, ha ha, this
[Guest]: is good, but it doesn't help the state government finances. I'm like, boss, you know, that's
[Guest]: very, very short sighted, because A, you are responsible for welfare of your people. And
[Guest]: if there are investments the state government can make that increase the capacity of local
[Guest]: governments to raise property taxes efficiently, that's good for welfare. But it's also good
[Guest]: for the state, because you create this positive cycle of increased economic activity that
[Guest]: translates into higher GST and other revenue for the state. So you know, overall, it makes
[Guest]: sense for states to invest purely from a fiscal perspective in the revenue raising capacity
[Guest]: of local government. So just to give you a sense of perspective, India's total property
[Guest]: tax to GDP is under point is around point 1%, okay, point 1 to point 1.5. I think in
[Guest]: France, it's about 3%. Okay, so it's about 25x or 30x. So that gives you a sense of how
[Guest]: far behind we are, where the feasible frontier is. And that's the kind of investment, again,
[Guest]: these are very concrete, implementable reforms, okay. And these are some of the things we're
[Guest]: working on. And see, just is that these are immediate things that will both increase fiscal
[Guest]: capacity and increase kind of effective federalism, because the local government now has the revenue
[Guest]: on which to act. So as an aside, it's a very nice research paper again. So I keep getting
[Guest]: excited about, I see I make connections, both to papers and podcasts, right. So there's
[Guest]: a very nice study in China, okay, that even though China is kind of centralized party
[Guest]: rule and stuff like that, China did have a period of experimenting with village level
[Guest]: elections, okay. And the logic was that to have at least local representatives, along
[Guest]: with the party secretary having a say in kind of what local projects were done. And one
[Guest]: of the most interesting results in the paper was that the local elections led to an increase
[Guest]: in people's willingness to pay taxes, okay. And that's because you're more willing to
[Guest]: pay tax if you have a say in how that tax is spent, okay. So anyway, so all I'm saying
[Guest]: is that part of the chicken and egg of our decentralization discourse in India, is because
[Guest]: of this chicken and egg of how do I decentralize when there's no capacity, and it all depends
[Guest]: on kind of the higher level largesse, okay, as opposed to building systems that make it
[Guest]: sustainable for there to be more effective local governance, the property tax agenda
[Guest]: becomes I think, a very, very important part of that state capacity that also strengthens
[Amit Varma]: federalism. Yeah, the China experiment is fascinating. I'm going to go on a mini tax
[Amit Varma]: rant here, because I think taxes are one of the things that we have normalized. Look,
[Amit Varma]: here's the thing. The thing is that let's say that I pay 30% of my income every year
[Amit Varma]: through taxes. So actually, I happen to pay more because 18% GST plus, which I can't offset
[Amit Varma]: against anything plus more than 30% income tax, almost half my income goes in taxes,
[Amit Varma]: a common rent. But just take a common citizen. And let's say a common citizen is paying 30%,
[Amit Varma]: one third of their income in taxes every year, direct plus indirect, because after all, everybody
[Amit Varma]: pays taxes, not just income taxpayers. Let's say your total is 33%.
[Guest]: Very quickly, India's overall tax to GDP ratio is only 18%. And that's because only 5% pay
[Guest]: income tax, right? So the bulk of people are paying the indirect taxes. And so GST will
[Guest]: end up being about 12. Yeah, anyway, so yeah.
[Amit Varma]: See you're spoiling the rhythm of my rant. If you were singing Antakshari, I would not
[Amit Varma]: cut in the middle of a song and let me tell you where this mukhra came from.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, yeah. So here's the deal. If you're paying 33% of your income as tax, that basically
[Amit Varma]: means that for four months of the year, let's say January to April, you are a slave of the
[Amit Varma]: government, you're working for the government without actually wanting to. So taxation is
[Amit Varma]: effectively part time slavery, which is a correct characterization. That is what it
[Amit Varma]: is without wanting to you're working for the government, all your income goes there for
[Amit Varma]: those four months. Now, this is fine, right? This is fine, because we need a state to survive,
[Amit Varma]: we need a state to protect our rights, etc, etc. We all agree upon this, I think ideologies
[Amit Varma]: really differ only on how much of this is justified, but we all agree that a state is
[Amit Varma]: justified. Now, what happens in India often is that most people they look around and they
[Amit Varma]: don't see bang for the buck, like you pointed out. And this is not by the way, an excuse
[Amit Varma]: for evading taxes, I pay my taxes scrupulously. You know, and in fact, it's a matter of principle
[Amit Varma]: for me to do so because as long as I'm a citizen here, I want to, you know, I otherwise I can't
[Amit Varma]: raise my voice if I don't also pay the taxes that gives me the right to do so. However,
[Amit Varma]: the point is that it has reached a stage in the modern time where you earlier one would
[Amit Varma]: look around and see all this money being basically wasted. Today, one looks around and see that
[Amit Varma]: this money is being used for bulldozers, and giant statues, and all of these things which
[Amit Varma]: I think are very toxic. So it is actually, you know, a question I'll throw to my listeners,
[Amit Varma]: that in this day and age, when you see what the state is doing with your money, is it
[Amit Varma]: moral to even pay taxes? And to this, my answer would not be to evade my taxes, evade your
[Amit Varma]: taxes rather, why would you evade my taxes unless you're me. But I think those who have
[Amit Varma]: the means would probably then leave, it would be logical, you know, you don't want to fund
[Amit Varma]: so many things that you actively disapprove of, because some of it is not incompetence,
[Amit Varma]: some of it is just malice directed towards your fellow citizens. So that's just one random
[Amit Varma]: rant I'll throw out. But I would say that, you know, like those people in China, I would
[Amit Varma]: be far happier to pay my taxes, if I could actually see that they were being used properly,
[Amit Varma]: if they were more local, if I could see that the police is actually active, it is safe
[Amit Varma]: to walk around at night, that women are not getting EVE teased, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: I would feel much more for it, except that part of the reason of the apathy of the Indian
[Amit Varma]: citizen is that they don't see this connection at all. And luckily, for the state, we've
[Amit Varma]: normalized taxes. Otherwise, if people realize they are part time slaves, I think there would
[Amit Varma]: be mass rebellion, but we've normalized this shit. But that is my little rant. That aside,
[Amit Varma]: you know, everything you said is illuminating. I almost feel like I've read chapter seven
[Amit Varma]: on revenue, even though you haven't sent it to me yet.
[Guest]: I'm just scratching the surface of ideas in each of these chapters. Yeah, anyway, so I'm
[Guest]: hopefully providing some alibi for why this book is taking time. But, you know, thank
[Guest]: you so much for having me on the show once a year, because it's also kind of, I think
[Guest]: it's a sneaky artist, right, who said, Nishant, see, I remember people now by their hand handles.
[Guest]: But I did the same with Bhagavan and Anirban last time, you know, but I think he said,
[Guest]: right, I mean, that as a writer, the hardest thing is like, you know, how long it takes
[Guest]: you to get feedback, and therefore the value of serializing things and stuff like that.
[Guest]: So you know, these episodes and stuff are very, very useful for me as a source of intermediate
[Guest]: validation that chalo, there's something sensible going on here. But you know, hopefully, we're
[Guest]: close to the finish line. And this guy should be out soon.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, I would be happy for you to stay forever. But maybe you're thinking like that. But yeah,
[Amit Varma]: so after sort of, you know, having given me all these insights on federalism, we've spoken
[Amit Varma]: about, you know, why it is desirable, we've spoken about what are the tensions that come
[Amit Varma]: in the way we've spoken about the Indian context, how that affected the design, the structure
[Amit Varma]: of our state in the sense that we are so centralized, what we need to do to change. Now, let's sort
[Amit Varma]: of get to the brass tacks of it. You have a section where you talk about implementable
[Amit Varma]: reform ideas. And I find that title itself extremely interesting, because it's not reform
[Amit Varma]: ideas, it's implementable reform ideas. So tell me a bit about these ideas, firstly,
[Amit Varma]: but also perhaps before that, how optimistic are you about them being implementable? Because,
[Amit Varma]: you know, before this conversation, I would have been fairly pessimistic. And I would
[Amit Varma]: have said, look at the incentives, why would those in power give up power, so on and so
[Amit Varma]: forth. But at the same time, what you've pointed out is that a lot of people within the system
[Amit Varma]: want the system to change, not because of their own individual considerations, but because
[Amit Varma]: they just want to, you know, they see the benefit that there would be for the people
[Amit Varma]: at large in the country at large from it changing. And I totally buy that, because I know so
[Amit Varma]: many such people who are within the government who understand that things need to change,
[Amit Varma]: who would be grateful for a blueprint and therefore will be grateful to read your book,
[Amit Varma]: it will now, you know, circulate in brown paper packets in government departments. I
[Amit Varma]: sincerely hope so, because who will be caught reading it openly? So tell me about why you're
[Amit Varma]: confident of, how confident are you of these changes actually being implemented? And also
[Amit Varma]: tell me more about each of these changes, because there's so much to dive into over
[Guest]: there.
[Guest]: Yeah. And again, you know, I think that there's a very, very broad list here. But you know,
[Guest]: so one thing I talk about is just, so I break this into things that can happen at the government
[Guest]: of India level, like, you know, and things that can happen at the state level, right.
[Guest]: So at the all India level, I would say, you know, there are two or three things. One is
[Guest]: I think there is a case potentially over time, without being very specific of considering
[Guest]: the case for smaller states, okay. And I think the data suggests that the MP Chhattisgarh,
[Guest]: the Bihar Jharkhand, the UP Uttarakhand, and recently even AP Telangana have all kind of,
[Guest]: you know, benefited just by kind of making the benefited governance and development outcomes
[Guest]: by and this is not unambiguous, like Jharkhand, I think regressed a little bit because it
[Guest]: had your classic resource curse kind of problem. Okay. But over time, I think the data suggests
[Guest]: that that's been positive, I think an even stronger piece of research and evidence comes
[Guest]: from. So there's this ongoing study we have where, you know, we're looking at this very
[Guest]: important governance reform that happened in under N. T. Ramarao in Andhra Pradesh in
[Guest]: the mid 80s, where one of his big governance reforms was kind of, and AP and Telangana
[Guest]: are still very, very unique on this, was kind of going from blocks to mandals. Okay, so
[Guest]: effectively, a block in India today, the average district is about 2 million people, and then
[Guest]: you have blocks of about 200 to 250,000. Right. But what they did was they went down to mandals
[Guest]: and thereby quadrupled the number of sub districts. Okay, so that went down to the average population
[Guest]: in a mandal is about 60 to 75,000, as opposed to 200 to 250,000. And so what that does,
[Guest]: is it basically brings government closer to the people. Okay, so there's an element both
[Guest]: of administrative decentralization and an element of political decentralization, because
[Guest]: your block parishad now becomes a mandal parishad, which is therefore closer to the people, right.
[Guest]: So, and there we've got kind of, we've been working on this for some time, put together
[Guest]: a whole bunch of data and development indicators. And you can look at kind of the distance to
[Guest]: the border and distance to capital. So you can have two places that are otherwise identical,
[Guest]: where the distance to the block capital has now changed. And what we're able to document
[Guest]: over time is that there is a significant acceleration in the development indicators in places that
[Guest]: became closer. And therefore, it kind of there is empirical evidence now broadly pointing
[Guest]: towards the value of bringing government closer to the people. Okay, so and you can do that
[Guest]: two ways. One is you can take the powers of an existing level of government and bring
[Guest]: that level itself closer, which is what happened in blocks to mandals. Or you can say, let's
[Guest]: take an existing disempowered level of local government and give it more power. Okay, so
[Guest]: I think in both of these cases, whether it's kind of smaller states or smaller districts,
[Guest]: right, I mean, there is a case for thinking about it seriously, because the population
[Guest]: has been growing, and the capacity is not kept up. Okay, so that's one simple thing.
[Guest]: I think the second thing is in terms of again, the government of India level is kind of really,
[Guest]: you know, modifying and rethinking centrally sponsored schemes, right? I mean, and it's
[Guest]: not just a question. It's not just a question of getting rid of them and spending the budgets.
[Guest]: There are very good reasons for centrally sponsored schemes, right, including kind of
[Guest]: sometimes from an equity perspective, the money that comes from the centrally sponsored
[Guest]: scheme becomes the most important way for a state to finance even its basic kind of
[Guest]: operations. Okay, so, like Maharashtra GDP per capita is five times higher than Bihar.
[Guest]: Okay, so left to its own resources, Bihar simply wouldn't be able to fund an education
[Guest]: system. Okay, so that way, the centrally sponsored scheme plays a very important role. The problem
[Guest]: is not in terms of the resource allocation. The problem is how rigid the guidelines are,
[Guest]: okay, with regard to how the money has to be spent. And so that has again, like three
[Guest]: or four problems, right? So one is the one size fit all nature of it, right? So Kerala
[Guest]: might need high schools and colleges, Bihar might still need some elementary schools,
[Guest]: but your national program kind of now over time as SSA became Samagrashiksha Abhiyan,
[Guest]: there is a bit more flexibility, but still, like, you know, mota moti, like, I mean, there
[Guest]: are tight kind of guidelines which restrict the flexibility across states. The second
[Guest]: problem is that because the centrally sponsored schemes have a co-financing model, where the
[Guest]: states have to put in, say, 50%, in some cases, it's 50-50, is not only are you constraining
[Guest]: the use of Government of India money, you're also constraining the state's own budget by
[Guest]: saying that the matching funds have to be sent along these lines. Okay, so that's another
[Guest]: source of kind of infringing on state level autonomy. I think there is a third dimension
[Guest]: of this, which is just an incredible amount of micromanaging, going back to process level
[Guest]: kind of, you know, micromanaging. And a senior advisor, Nitya Yog once told me that, you
[Guest]: know, in the health department under National Health Mission, that every year, there's what
[Guest]: is called a PIP, I think, Project Implementation Plan or something, under which there are 1500
[Guest]: permitted line items. So every year, every state has to submit this PIP that has to be
[Guest]: reviewed and approved. So if you just think about the paperwork of 1500 line items times
[Guest]: 28 states, so in the end, it just employs an army of consultants on one side to make
[Guest]: the reports, an army of consultants on the other side to read them, but nothing substantively
[Guest]: actually happens as a result of that, right? So it's just incredibly inefficient, because
[Guest]: you don't trust them, because you micromanage and saying, yeh karna, yeh karna, yeh karna,
[Guest]: yeh aapko report karna hai, right? So that's a third cost. And a fourth cost is, frankly,
[Guest]: over time, and I mentioned this, I think, in the education episode, it has led to a
[Guest]: substantial weakening of policymaking muscles and capacity at the state level, okay, which
[Guest]: is essentially if, if, because and remember what I said, I said, states are bigger than
[Guest]: most countries, right? So you really should have the policymaking capacity to think about
[Guest]: your local problems and craft your local solutions. The problem today is if you're a principal
[Guest]: secretary or commissioner who wants to do something innovative in the state, you are
[Guest]: much more likely to do it if it is consistent with central government guidelines, because
[Guest]: then you can use that money. Whereas if you have to do something outside the guidelines,
[Guest]: then you have to argue with your finance department, right? You need to get the money and that
[Guest]: is a much more complex process. Okay, so what has happened, therefore, is that while the
[Guest]: centrally sponsored schemes have created the budgetary space for the social sector, they
[Guest]: have also had come at severe cost. So, so one of the very, very concrete reform ideas
[Guest]: which I have is again going back to this idea of, you know, autonomy and process and accountability
[Guest]: for outcomes, okay, so whereby it's not just, in a way, the government of India faces exactly
[Guest]: the same problem, say, that a World Bank faces when it's doing development aid, okay, which
[Guest]: is you want to give money to the places that need it, okay, but the places that need it
[Guest]: are also the poorest, most poorly governed, okay. And so, in a way, you put in all of
[Guest]: these conditions, because of the poor governance in the places that need it the most, but that
[Guest]: also ends up biting the better off states that are well governed, and frankly, don't
[Guest]: need your interventions, okay. So, you know, one intermediate level might just be performance
[Guest]: based autonomy, okay, forget performance based financing, but just performance based autonomy
[Guest]: that says, I mean, frankly, today, a government of Tamil Nadu or Kerala will say, what do
[Guest]: we have to learn from government of India on education, we're doing better on all of
[Guest]: these indicators, right, like, I mean, so, for the states that are doing better, at least,
[Guest]: right, I mean, you might say, here is money with fewer conditions and just report, right,
[Guest]: you still have to report, but there is a lot that can be done. Now, of course, eventually,
[Guest]: I think having an element of performance based funding, again, going back to 172010, right,
[Guest]: that says, you know, here's government money, we're going to allocate this certain amount
[Guest]: equally by child, a certain amount, an additional amount for underperforming or backward states
[Guest]: that just allows them to build those gaps, and 10% on performance, right, so that there
[Guest]: is skin in the game for everybody to kind of innovate on delivering, right. So, those
[Guest]: would be kind of some of the reform ideas at the central level. So, you know, things
[Guest]: and then there is a third core reform idea at the central level, which draws on this
[Guest]: business standard article I wrote in 2011, which really is and the good news is more
[Guest]: of this is happening, okay, more of this is happening, but it's to really unleash the
[Guest]: states in terms of policy experimentation, okay. So, when we think about, you know, very
[Guest]: contentious issues like land reform or labour reform, things like that, you know, trying
[Guest]: to do this at the Government of India level is just too difficult, right, because there
[Guest]: are multiple veto players, it's too risky, but you just say, listen, let states innovate
[Guest]: and experiment. But remember, many of these issues are in the concurrent list, okay. So,
[Guest]: the Government of India rules will still override the state government rules. So, for the state
[Guest]: government rules to take primacy within the state still requires presidential assent.
[Guest]: So, there is a provision for that, but Government of India can encourage a lot more state level
[Guest]: policy innovation in the concurrent list by kind of indicating that if you kind of provide
[Guest]: a very clear rationale for this, right, then we will be more willing to kind of support
[Guest]: this for presidential assent, okay. So, those would be kind of concrete things that can
[Guest]: happen at the Government of India level. Then there's a lot more things that need to happen
[Guest]: at the state level, right. And so, one of the things there is this business, the nuanced
[Guest]: decentralisation I talked about, because that's completely within the limit of a state government,
[Guest]: right, because you control the people, you control the budgets, and so it's about how
[Guest]: much am I empowering local governments. Similarly, investing in property tax capacity is something
[Guest]: that a state government can do, right, I mean, that strengthens local government. And then,
[Guest]: in some ways, the most radical reform would be kind of more empowered mayors, you know,
[Guest]: which many people have talked about. Now, the interesting thing here is, one view, okay,
[Guest]: is that chief ministers don't want to do this because it creates alternate power centres,
[Guest]: right, which is a threat to them. So, just like in New York, in the state of New York,
[Guest]: the mayor of New York is often more powerful than the governor of New York State who's
[Guest]: sitting in Albany, but New York City is the cash cow, and that's where all the action
[Guest]: is, right. Similarly, an empowered mayor of Mumbai would become a real threat to the chief
[Guest]: minister of Maharashtra, in like Indonesia, you know, Jokowi became president of the country
[Guest]: from mayor of Jakarta, right, like, you know, so that was kind of like a really important
[Guest]: post and position. But here is a way why I think empowered mayors can be politically
[Guest]: incentive compatible, right, which is one of the kind of design dysfunctions of our
[Guest]: democracy right now is that we elect MLAs and MPs to be legislators, but their voters
[Guest]: fundamentally see them as providing constituency services, okay. So, the voters are not evaluating
[Guest]: them on did you pass good laws, the voters are evaluating them on did you make my life
[Guest]: better, okay. So, part of the dysfunction of the system, why does an MLA or MP want
[Guest]: the power to transfer people, because even though we call that political interference,
[Guest]: the flip side of that is, it is the power to transfer that gives this guy any authority
[Guest]: on the otherwise kind of, you know, indifferent official who may not listen, okay. So, in
[Guest]: many ways, like, I mean, the MLA or MPs are kind of dealt a very, very difficult hand
[Guest]: where they are expected to deliver constituency services without being given the means to
[Guest]: do that, because all they have is this MP LAD, which is a minuscule amount of money
[Guest]: compared to the actual budgets of the departments, right. So, what an empowered mayor does and
[Guest]: why I hope there will be political demand for this, right, I mean, is that even if a
[Guest]: chief minister is hesitant, like a bunch of MLAs themselves would prefer to be empowered
[Guest]: mayors like, I mean, of their areas, where there is kind of alignment of accountability
[Guest]: and what the voters are holding, you know. So, in a way, voters are holding them accountable
[Guest]: for constituency services, but they don't have the means to deliver that. So, if you
[Guest]: harmonize those things, it would also kind of, you know, strengthen our democracy by
[Guest]: better aligning accountability with authority to deliver on that. So, again, this is the
[Guest]: kind of thing, the good news is that there is nothing that prevents a chief minister
[Guest]: from undertaking these reforms within their state, okay. So, and why I think the level
[Guest]: at which we need to have these reform conversations is now, Government of India can kind of, you
[Guest]: know, they can do a few things, like Finance Commission has put some incentives for states
[Guest]: that increase their property taxes and stuff like that. And I think Finance Ministry has
[Guest]: also done some of that, right. But fundamentally, this is a state level political action, okay.
[Guest]: So, you know, all it takes is one chief minister. And it's actually quite interesting in my
[Guest]: conversations on Tamil Nadu, right, for example, informally, they will say that Kerala has
[Guest]: done much better than us in decentralization. And this is something that we should consider.
[Guest]: So, I think, again, the desire and willingness to take up new ideas is there. I think the
[Guest]: challenge is, how do you de-risk this? Okay, how do you de-risk this? Because nobody, even
[Guest]: at a state level, tomorrow, see NTR, like going from districts to blocks to mandals
[Guest]: is a big change, right, that happens across the state. So, even politicians who are well-meaning
[Guest]: are often just risk-averse of trying to do something massive that is irreversible. So,
[Guest]: one of the things which, you know, I briefly discussed, I mean, again, that's why each
[Guest]: of these chapters can become an entire book, right, I mean, is to then see, are there kind
[Guest]: of constitutional and legal mechanisms that allow some experiments to be done in a sub-region
[Guest]: of the state, as opposed to kind of doing it for the whole state. So, then you might
[Guest]: feel, okay, here's a couple of districts where I'm going to, or a couple of cities, or tier
[Guest]: two cities, where we're going to experiment, you know, with more empowered mayors. So,
[Guest]: I think, in each of these things, the question, and I'll come back to CJ's at the end, is
[Guest]: that I, this is a broader meta-point I want to make, right, I mean, which is that part
[Guest]: of the reason a lot of these changes don't happen is we're just not having the conversations
[Guest]: across the different stakeholders in the system, okay. So, you know, and leave the politicians
[Guest]: out for a moment, right, even just academia, industry, and bureaucracy, okay. So, when
[Guest]: I look at, go to these policy conferences, there are so many low-hanging fruit of policy
[Guest]: area, where better academic research and analysis can immediately improve outcomes, okay. The
[Guest]: problem is that the academics have no patience for the bureaucrats, and the bureaucrats have
[Guest]: no respect, saying the academics are sitting in the theoretical world, like, I mean, they
[Guest]: are not working on problems we care about. And then industry thinks academics are too
[Guest]: esoteric, and bureaucrats are too slow. So, but again, everybody has a stake, right, in
[Guest]: moving this stuff together. Now, we do have certain fora of these conversations, you know,
[Guest]: CII will, you know, get together, industry, government, whatever. But I think part of
[Guest]: how we move forward is by marrying kind of a certain amount of conceptual clarity with
[Guest]: a very real understanding of what are the risks of the reform, and thinking about ways
[Guest]: of de-risking the reforms, okay, and accompany that with a certain amount of implementation
[Guest]: support, which is partly why we're building CJIS, and then also accompany that with evaluation
[Guest]: and research to say, like, you know, are the reforms working? So, in a way, like, if you
[Guest]: look at the different parts of the production function of knowledge to action, right, there
[Guest]: is kind of, there is deep research that says, okay, what is the impact of a specific policy?
[Guest]: Then there's policy recommendations that say, based on all of this research, here are reforms
[Guest]: we should do. Then there is kind of, you know, implementation support that says, if you want
[Guest]: to do this, how do you actually make it happen? And then you need to close the loop back with
[Guest]: research and evaluation to saying, ye hamne kiya hai, did this actually move us in the
[Guest]: right direction? And if not, how do we course-correct quickly, right? So, yeah, so that's my long-winded
[Guest]: way of kind of saying how I see us making progress on these things. And the good news,
[Guest]: again, is that bilaterally, right, at the political level, at the bureaucratic level,
[Guest]: the amount of support I see, I mean, there's property taxes, right? You say, oh, yes, ye
[Guest]: karna hai humko. But the problem for your typical bureaucrat is they are just firefighting.
[Guest]: I don't think any of us understands how much pressure, right, like, you know, say a principal
[Guest]: secretary of finance is under, right? I mean, these are people controlling budgets of about
[Guest]: 200,000 crores, and the sheer amount of pressure they are under, right, is just, you know,
[Guest]: you're just constantly firefighting, right? Constantly firefighting. So, when you go in
[Guest]: with kind of both a conceptual clarity and an implementation roadmap and some support,
[Guest]: I'm seeing that people are actually very, very, very willing to listen. So, yeah, so
[Guest]: we have to be optimistic and keep trying.
[Amit Varma]: You've made me incredibly sympathetic towards a principal secretary of finance who's constantly
[Amit Varma]: firefighting about what to do with 2000 crores. Man, what a problem.
[Amit Varma]: It's a huge problem. It's a huge problem.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and, you know, I'm very excited with these ideas. As you can see, I'm swaying back
[Amit Varma]: and forth in my chair, that could also be because the moment you said, everybody has
[Amit Varma]: a stake, I felt hungry. So, you know, and just thinking aloud, you know, one way of
[Amit Varma]: politicians becoming risk averse about politicians feeling that we can move ahead with this,
[Amit Varma]: we know it's the right thing to do. But now we can actually do it is if there is a public
[Amit Varma]: constituency for these ideas, like in a sense, we need public intellectuals like yourself
[Amit Varma]: to be the Gandhi's of good ideas, right? And which is why I hope your book does really
[Amit Varma]: well. And at some point, you know, maybe YouTube, we should brainstorm sometime because, you
[Amit Varma]: know, I think, for real change to happen, you need to hit the demand end of the political
[Amit Varma]: marketplace, the supply and can sometimes be a bit shaky. So, sort of last question
[Amit Varma]: on federalism and these reforms until our next episode. The last question in this episode
[Amit Varma]: is, you know, how you know, in percentage terms, because I think rather than say how
[Amit Varma]: optimistic are you, you'll say, ha, I'm optimistic, so many people are good people, they won't
[Amit Varma]: change. But if I ask you to put a number on it and say that, what is in percentages, what
[Amit Varma]: is the chance that by 2030, you know, enough of these changes would have been implemented
[Amit Varma]: for you to feel that there has been, you know, a meaningful progress, you know, what would
[Amit Varma]: be that percentage chance? And frankly, honestly, even if it's 1%, I would still say it is worth
[Amit Varma]: trying because the impact of that would be so massive, that it's, you know, positive
[Amit Varma]: EV just to try for that. So, I'm not going to judge by percentage, I'm just, you know,
[Amit Varma]: trying to get a sense of how likely you feel it is by asking you for a number.
[Guest]: No, see, I think, I mean, so I don't think I have a number in the for the following reason,
[Guest]: right, which is, and I can come back and, you know, talk about CJIS as well a little
[Guest]: bit more. See, the way I'm approaching this is, what maximizes the probability, right,
[Guest]: in that a lot of these things will happen, right? So, the book is laying out an entire
[Guest]: menu of reform ideas, right? So, some of them will catch fire somewhere, others will not,
[Guest]: some will fall completely flat, and nobody will pick up anything, right? But then, what
[Guest]: we're seeing at CJIS is that there is already so much appreciation of the work that we're
[Guest]: doing, right? I mean, and, you know, again, I prefer the government to kind of talk about
[Guest]: it rather than me talk about it, but I'll just say that there is, there are enough indicators
[Guest]: of real revealed preference, right, in terms of the cross conversations happening across
[Guest]: states and people calling us and stuff like that. So, I feel actually very optimistic
[Guest]: that out of this broad agenda, we will do maybe somewhere between 30 to 50% of these
[Guest]: ideas in at least one state, okay, and over 10 years, right? Because like they say, people,
[Guest]: you underestimate what you can, you overestimate what you can do in one year and underestimate
[Guest]: what you can do in 10 years, right? I mean, so, which is partly why, you know, I see this
[Guest]: as a 10-20 year investment, right? I mean, in the kind of reforms, but I'm actually,
[Guest]: I'm very optimistic. And it's not just, okay, I mean, now to be realistic, in terms of the
[Guest]: nature of even government officials or bureaucracies, right? I mean, is that, see, there are 20,
[Guest]: and this I'm just generalizing, right? But in most orgs, about 20%, who are really outstanding,
[Guest]: okay, who kind of are thinkers, who are well intentioned, motivated, really, really kind
[Guest]: of want to get stuff done. There's about 60%, I would say, like, you know, who are good,
[Guest]: but over time have had the enthusiasm beaten out of them, right? I mean, and so they have
[Guest]: essentially kind of doing, you know, not doing bad things, but not going out of the way to
[Guest]: kind of, you know, take on, they're kind of minding the store. And then there's always
[Guest]: the 10 to 20%, you know, who are actually kind of the malevolent actors, or at least
[Guest]: who have kind of figured out how to milk the current system, who are therefore very nervous,
[Guest]: like, you know, of certain changes. But, you know, the good news, what I'm seeing in many
[Guest]: states, and maybe this is, again, reflecting the fact that the main place I interact with
[Guest]: is finance, is that most states actually put really good people in finance, because finance
[Guest]: is not something you can afford to mess with, because, you know, you see Sri Lanka, you
[Guest]: see other things, like states go bankrupt, okay. So, in fact, in many of the states that
[Guest]: we work in, the finance has a certain amount of both sanctity and competence, right? I
[Guest]: mean, so yeah, so maybe that's why we are seeing a positive reaction, because every
[Guest]: finance secretary is kind of, so a different way of saying this, is that almost all of
[Guest]: our public discourse happens on kind of quantity of expenditure to sectors, we just have much
[Guest]: less discussion on the quality of expenditure, right? I mean, and the core thing we're doing
[Guest]: is about improving that quality. And that's something that any finance secretary instinctively
[Guest]: understands. And so if you are able to support that, you know, people have been very, very
[Guest]: positive about it. Now, of course, all the ideas eventually have to go through political
[Guest]: filters and stuff like that. But, you know, and even as an economic advisor, I think Arun
[Guest]: Subramanian, recently, once said this about Arun Subramanian, he said, you know, his job
[Guest]: is to present ideas, we don't have to accept all of them, right? I mean, but we will listen.
[Guest]: And that's the most you can ask for, right? So yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's kind of what this podcast does. Our job is to talk about ideas, other people
[Amit Varma]: can only listen. So we choose to, you know, do something or not. But yeah, and they choose
[Amit Varma]: to listen. And they're still here four plus hours into the thing. And why are they here?
[Amit Varma]: They're here because we haven't discussed your paper yet. You said it's the most important
[Amit Varma]: paper you've done. We haven't discussed it yet. We cannot, we cannot disappoint them
[Amit Varma]: at this moment in time. So briefly, you know, I know you're tired. I know you're tired.
[Amit Varma]: I don't want to, I don't want to mess with you too much. India needs you. Take care of
[Amit Varma]: your health. Don't get COVID again. So tell us about your NREGA paper. And you know, why
[Guest]: it's so exciting.
[Guest]: Yeah, so I mean, we can have much longer, if at some point we do an episode just on
[Guest]: welfare and social protection, we can have a longer discussion. But see, I think the
[Guest]: core, so what is the paper doing? Okay, the paper is presenting large scale, randomized
[Guest]: experiment evidence of what happens to the overall economy, then you improve the implementation
[Guest]: of NREGA. Okay, so now NREGA itself as a program when it was rolled out was not randomized.
[Guest]: Okay, so the best evaluations to date have relied on what's called a difference in difference
[Guest]: where you look at districts that got it with districts that did not. But the problem is
[Guest]: those districts were not randomly selected, right? So there's other pre-existing differences.
[Guest]: And the other problem is that there wasn't a big round of the NSS at that time. So you
[Guest]: actually haven't had good enough data on many of the outcomes we care about. So the literature
[Guest]: in NREGA itself has had, you know, what my co-author Sandeep Sukhtankar calls, what we
[Guest]: call Sukhtankar's third law of NREGS, right, which is for every study that finds X, there
[Guest]: are studies that find minus X or zero. Okay, so, and that's part of the challenge with
[Guest]: research because the results are sensitive to the method, sensitive to the data, sensitive
[Guest]: to the state, and that's been a big challenge. So the opportunity in this paper was, and
[Guest]: frankly, this was a bit of an accidental paper, we're not expected to write it. The reason
[Guest]: it's an accidental paper was the randomized control trial we did was actually designed
[Guest]: to study an intervention to reduce corruption and improve implementation. Okay, so that
[Guest]: paper, which was published in the American Economic Review in 2016, was called Building
[Guest]: State Capacity. And that was studying in unified Andhra Pradesh in eight districts, randomized
[Guest]: across a population of about 20 million people. It was studying the effectiveness of biometric
[Guest]: smart cards on improving NREGA implementation. Okay, so the outcome there was really just
[Guest]: NREGA implementation, which is how much, you know, did you get your money. So we measure
[Guest]: leakage very carefully, because we measure the administrative data on how much money
[Guest]: was dispersed to a given job card, and we do matched household surveys to measure, did
[Guest]: you actually get it? Okay, so part of the problem with the public discourse and say
[Guest]: Aadhaar or biometrics and leakage is that the government says we have reduced leakage
[Guest]: because we have reduced the spending. Okay, the activists will say yes, but you have increased
[Guest]: exclusion because the money, you know, people are not getting. So unless you have matched
[Guest]: data between the government disbursals and what people are getting, you are only seeing
[Guest]: half the side of the puzzle, right? So the methodological, I mean, the strength of that
[Guest]: paper is A, we have randomized across eight districts at the mandal level. So in fact,
[Guest]: statistically, this is why it's lovely to work in Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, because
[Guest]: you can randomize at the mandal level and get a large sample because you have four times
[Guest]: as many mandals as districts. So, but that was a side benefit, right? That's not why
[Guest]: we were there. We were there because I'd worked in the state before. But, and AP was one of
[Guest]: the leaders in NREGA. Okay, so but long story short, that paper, which is was done in 2016,
[Guest]: essentially finds that the smart cards had a dramatic positive effect in improving both
[Guest]: kind of in reducing corruption, improving timeliness of payments and improving the predictability
[Guest]: of payments. Okay, so in every way, and that's why that paper is called Building State Capacity,
[Guest]: because it brings the program closer to what the framers of the law intended it to do.
[Guest]: Okay, so that's what that paper does. Now, how this paper emerged was really as an accident
[Guest]: and going back to what I'm saying, you know, as researchers, the joys in discovering new
[Guest]: facts and then making sense of it, right? So this is really an example of that journey,
[Guest]: right? We had not expected to find these results, or write this paper. So one of the results
[Guest]: we were looking at in 2015, or 2014, was looking at the impact on total incomes of the poor
[Guest]: in their treated areas. Okay. And what you saw was that there was this huge increase
[Guest]: in income, okay, and the increase in income was 10 times higher than the increase in NREGA
[Guest]: income. Because remember, we've reduced corruption in NREGA, you've reduced the work done in
[Guest]: those days. So there is obviously an increase in NREGA income. Okay. But what's interesting
[Guest]: is that the total income increase goes up about 12 to 13%. And only 10% of that is coming
[Guest]: from NREGA. The remaining 90% seems to be coming from other sources. Okay. And so that
[Guest]: became this huge puzzle. And it was such a big puzzle that we realized that we could
[Guest]: not do justice to that in the previous paper. Okay, so that previous, so this is then, I
[Guest]: mean, this is something Paul Sandeep and I have been working on now for about 14 years.
[Guest]: Okay, we started in 2009. Okay, so to give you a sense of what the academic life looks
[Guest]: like, two papers, okay, two major papers, we worked on for 14 years. Okay, so, you know,
[Guest]: we thought and designed the experiments, we worked with the government to get the buy-in,
[Guest]: we raised the funding for it, we did the randomization, there were two years from 2010 to 2012, where
[Guest]: the actual experiment happened, you had endline data collection in 2012. Then it took us kind
[Guest]: of, you know, a year to clean and analyze the data, start writing the first draft, start
[Guest]: presenting in conferences, getting feedback, iterating, submitted for publication in 2014,
[Guest]: then you get the revise and resubmit from the journals, finally appears in print in
[Guest]: 2016. Okay, so that is that first paper. The genesis of the second paper starts in about
[Guest]: 2015, when we start seeing that these income effects are so big, and we're like, how on
[Guest]: earth do you make sense of this? Okay. And then what is really kind of interesting was
[Guest]: that we see that the private sector income has gone up very sharply in both agriculture
[Guest]: and non-agriculture, we see that the market wage has gone up. And then the most kind of
[Guest]: stunning result is that not only has the wage gone up, but private sector employment has
[Guest]: also gone up, okay, which is kind of violating econ 101, which is normally when wages go
[Guest]: up, employment goes down. Okay, so how could wages and employment both go up? Okay, so
[Guest]: long story short, I think, we have ourselves puzzled and struggled, right? And in fact,
[Guest]: in the early years, so this paper we had first written and presented at one of the top conferences
[Guest]: in 2016. And we thought we had enough in those results, because it was randomised, right?
[Guest]: Because the experiment was randomised. So we thought we had enough on those results
[Guest]: to merit a top journal publication, right? So we submitted then, you know, to the QGE.
[Guest]: Now, these are intricacies of the academic publication process, which is, you know, the
[Guest]: Quarterly Journal of Economics. And we got a very kind of, you know, sympathetic rejection,
[Guest]: saying that everybody thought that the question was important, everything was important, but
[Guest]: basically people felt the results were too big, okay, that they just couldn't make sense
[Guest]: of it. And they wanted us to probe harder on the mechanisms, okay, of what is happening,
[Guest]: what is the mechanism by which both wages and employment could go up. And because the
[Guest]: result is so counterintuitive, and this goes back to the peer review process, because the
[Guest]: result is so counterintuitive, I think it's natural for reviewers to pressure test more,
[Guest]: okay, and saying, is there some mistake, right, in your data collection, in your sampling
[Guest]: and stuff like that. So long story short, we got rejected at both the QGE and the AER,
[Guest]: the American Economic Review, which are two of the top publications. And then we went
[Guest]: back to the drawing board, because we really had a sense that this result was truly important,
[Guest]: right? And this is where the value of the randomised control trial comes in. Because
[Guest]: suppose the result was just correlational, I would always say, okay, maybe the result
[Guest]: is spurious, because of some omitted variable, okay. But because this was randomised, there
[Guest]: is no questioning the facts. It's like Sherlock Holmes says, right, if the facts change, then
[Guest]: you change your mind. And that's, again, the power of the RCT in this case was because
[Guest]: the facts were incontrovertible, right? So we then had to go back and question our assumptions
[Guest]: of how do you make sense of the fact, okay. And if you go back to econ theory, you'll
[Guest]: see that, basically, how can wages and employment both go up, they can go up for multiple reasons,
[Guest]: they can go up if the NREGA assets made people more productive, okay. They could go up if,
[Guest]: basically, if there was employer market power, okay, with monopsony. So this is the kind
[Guest]: of a very nuanced kind of result. But essentially, a monopolist is kind of going to suppress
[Guest]: quantity and jack up price. A monopsonist who's a single buyer, if you have market power,
[Guest]: you will keep the wage low and keep employment also low. So historically, if you look at
[Guest]: the origins of trade unions, and why unions in the 19th century UK were a good thing for
[Guest]: both equity and efficiency, is that if you have a monopsonist buyer, then putting market
[Guest]: power on the side of the employees actually improves both wages and employment up to a
[Guest]: point, okay. It's only when you go over that, that it becomes kind of, you know, then it's
[Guest]: an insider and seeking business, okay. So the theoretical mechanisms were could there
[Guest]: be monopsony and then there is an aggregate demand effect, okay, which is that if the
[Guest]: poor have more income, and if they're demanding local goods and services, then that could
[Guest]: create a demand multiplier in the local economy, okay. But then we had to go back to the drawing
[Guest]: board to figure out how would we test all of these possible hypotheses and mechanisms,
[Guest]: correct. So the first kind, and again, we got very lucky in some ways, that the experiment
[Guest]: happened 2010 to 2012. And this was a period when the socio-economic caste census happened
[Guest]: in late 2011, and the economic census happened in 2013. See, one of the, this is now very
[Guest]: small, but one of the challenges for us was that our data in our survey, we were sampling
[Guest]: from the universe of NREGA job card holders, okay. So that is 50% of the population. But
[Guest]: we didn't have survey data from the employers, okay, from the landlord. So even if wages
[Guest]: here are going up, maybe there is enough offset there that the net effects could be negative,
[Guest]: okay. So how do you truly say that the effects are positive? So for that, we need to get
[Guest]: census data that goes beyond our survey. So we got lucky that the SEC sees a census, the
[Guest]: economic census is a census, and this happened late 2011-2013. So long story short, this
[Guest]: is a bit like, I keep saying that, but it is a bit of a detective story, right, because
[Guest]: I'm giving you a sense of both the results and the journey of how we got there, right.
[Guest]: So now what happens with the SECC data, which is really nice, is that we have data on every
[Guest]: individual in the village, correct, but it also gives you the land holdings. And so that
[Guest]: allows you to construct a measure of landholder concentration in every village, which is then
[Guest]: a measure of monopsony and a measure of employer market power, okay. And what we're able to
[Guest]: test and show is that the employment effect of improving NREGA is more positive in areas
[Guest]: where there is more employer market power, which is completely consistent with the monopsony
[Guest]: story, okay. And so then that gives you the smoking gun evidence on the mechanism. And
[Guest]: then what's very interesting is, because our survey data is not like the NSS, we didn't
[Guest]: have very detailed data on consumption, okay, but we had good data on savings. And you see
[Guest]: that people are spending most of this extra money, right. And so we also find evidence
[Guest]: of this demand multiplier, because what you see in the economic census is there is an
[Guest]: increase in the number of non-agricultural firms and an increase in the employment in
[Guest]: these firms. And most of these are very, very, very small local firms, okay. So, and again,
[Guest]: this goes back to, so the reason I, you know, I'll come back to why I think the paper is
[Guest]: kind of why I personally find it the most important paper is because it also connects
[Guest]: to many, many old classic issues in development, right, that when people are very, very poor,
[Guest]: you can get these kind of demand externalities, whereby you can kind of crowd in a positive
[Guest]: cycle of kind of firm creation as well. And, you know, so anyway, long, and then there's
[Guest]: a bunch of other work in terms of mechanisms and credit and all of this. So that's why
[Guest]: it's, you know, but a paper like this, and the journal restricts us to 40 to 45 pages,
[Guest]: and then we've got about 60 pages of appendices, right, mean with each appendix going through
[Guest]: different robustness, building a formal model of rural labour markets, quantifying the extent
[Guest]: of employee market power. And so, yeah, so I think, you know, the journey of the paper
[Guest]: is after we did all of this, I think in 2019, with, 2019, yes, this is, again, giving you
[Guest]: a sense of how long these things take. Submit to Econometrica, right, which is another of
[Guest]: the most prestigious journals. So three referees, but then I think the editor got caught with
[Guest]: COVID and health issues and stuff. So it took 11 months to come back, then it took us 11
[Guest]: months to kind of do the revision, including most of last summer, because we took three
[Guest]: entire months, just redoing so much of the analysis. Then there is this very cool piece
[Guest]: of analysis we did, which will then bring me back to how this is connected to federalism.
[Guest]: Okay, so because that was the context in which I sent you the paper, you know, is that one
[Guest]: of the cool things we were able to do in the revision is that we were able to do a full
[Guest]: distribution analysis in the following way, right, because remember, I told you, we only
[Guest]: have data on NREGA job card holders, which is only 50% of the population, okay. But what
[Guest]: we were able to do is, even in that NREGA sample, it turns out that the returns to land
[Guest]: actually fall, okay, because if wages have gone up and productivity has not gone up,
[Guest]: then somebody has to lose, okay, and prices have not gone up. So it turns out that land
[Guest]: profits do fall, okay, like I mean, in areas with better implemented NREGA. And what we
[Guest]: can do is we can take that result and overlay that on the SECC land distribution, because
[Guest]: SECC gives you the entire distribution. And that provides this very nice distributional
[Guest]: analysis that shows that the aggregate effects are positive, but the bottom 92% of the population
[Guest]: does much better, okay, but the top seven and a half percent of top landholders do lose
[Guest]: because their loss of profits is greater, okay, like I mean, than the gain in income.
[Guest]: And that connects us back to the political economy of local elites and distribution,
[Guest]: right, that even though this was a program that on aggregate improved both equity and
[Guest]: efficiency, it did come at the cost of local power structures, and which is why there was
[Guest]: so much vociferous opposition from landlords, okay, like to this, which is documented both
[Guest]: by you know, Drez and Hrithika Khera and others. But in fact, this is other beautiful American
[Guest]: economic review paper by Ashok Kotwal and co-authors. In fact, he just passed away recently
[Guest]: and he was a giant in, you know, in economics. And this was a paper called clientelism in
[Guest]: Indian villages, where they study local elections in Maharashtra, very, very carefully. And
[Guest]: one of the points they make is that the entire reason local elites want to control local
[Guest]: governments is that they want to thwart the implementation of programs like NREGA. Okay,
[Guest]: so and you can see how this connects all the way back to our federalism loop, right, and
[Guest]: mean that a progressive state that wants to improve outcomes for the most marginalized
[Guest]: has to deal with the resistance that will come from local elites. And what made NREGA,
[Guest]: what improved NREGA implementation, even today in Bihar and other places, the feudal structure
[Guest]: has been too strong for NREGA to be effectively implemented, right. So it took a political
[Guest]: decision in Andhra to prioritize NREGA implementation. The chief minister put one of their top officers
[Guest]: as rural development secretary for five years, to kind of continuously push on different
[Guest]: aspects of NREGA implementation. So there's another whole book recently by Rajesh Veeraragavan
[Guest]: called patching development, and he talks both about the top down and how the implementation
[Guest]: itself took kind of very strong political and bureaucratic will, and a lot of this required
[Guest]: top down technological interventions, and bottom up mechanisms of social audits, whereby
[Guest]: you did bring the community in, but you empowered them by kind of creating a directorate of
[Guest]: social audit within the department, and then gave people the power to go and audit whether
[Guest]: these projects are actually taking place, right. So even something as, you know, what
[Guest]: sounds like, oh, this is just implementation, it's an enormous undertaking, right, to take
[Guest]: a program like this, that is upending local power structures, and how do you implement
[Guest]: that? And this is then circles back with why the research is so important. And why do I
[Guest]: consider this the most important paper? It's because it proved my initial hypothesis wrong,
[Guest]: right. So my initial hunch in the 2000s was that this is kind of, you know, that it cannot
[Guest]: be good for the economy to boost wages without boosting productivity, right. And the fact
[Guest]: that we found this was positive, it was positive in the experimental results. So that forces
[Guest]: us to go back and question our priors, think about what is the data that will allow us
[Guest]: to test these things. And then it's a detective story, right? And then one initial hypothesis
[Guest]: we had was maybe it's the NREGA assets, okay, that are building productivity. But then you
[Guest]: go look at the data and do some calibrations, and it turns out it is not the assets, okay.
[Guest]: So anyway, so this is now getting into the weeds of the paper, and people can read 100
[Guest]: pages if they want at least 45 pages of it. And then, you know, we just got our second
[Guest]: round revise and resubmit. And, you know, we spent 11 months and given how grumpy referees
[Guest]: tend to be like, you know, one of the gratifying things was the referee report starting with
[Guest]: I have been very impressed by the amount of work the authors have done, like in this paper.
[Guest]: But this then gives you an example of why books get delayed, because that is still my
[Guest]: core job, right, of kind of actually writing these research papers.
[Amit Varma]: No, it just sounds like such an amazing paper, because it's not just about economics, it's
[Amit Varma]: also about society. It's also about politics. Like this is a heck of a detective story.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, if it's a web series, who would you like to play you?
[Amit Varma]: I haven't thought about that at all.
[Amit Varma]: Think about it. Now I'm going to put you on the spot. What is this? Think about it. Who
[Amit Varma]: would you like to play you?
[Guest]: No, I'm, I'm just not good at this. But yeah, eventually, like, you know, maybe, yeah, maybe
[Guest]: you are the creative guy, you can think about somebody who would be excited about this,
[Guest]: but I don't I don't watch enough TV or movies to immediately have a name. Again, part of
[Guest]: the academic temperament is to say, I don't know when I don't know, like, you know, so
[Guest]: you can't force me to answer something I don't know.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, I'll, you can tell me in song in the next Antakshari we do for the next episode.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm just like, 14 years on two papers, my God.
[Guest]: And that's not the only thing that's happening, right? I mean, it is, I mean, there are a
[Guest]: whole bunch of other things that happen. But I think part of the research process is that
[Guest]: there is this constant process of discovery, rediscovery. And I think the one thing in
[Guest]: economics that's different from other fields is many other fields publish very short papers
[Guest]: with new facts as an experiment. The thing in economics is, because there is this need
[Guest]: to not just get the result, but at least for the top journals, to really probe into mechanisms
[Guest]: and saying, because you don't get published in the top journal, if this was just about
[Guest]: NREGA in India, right? It is what is it illustrating about the mechanisms of rural labour markets?
[Guest]: What is it illustrating about the mechanisms of some of these demand externalities, etc.
[Guest]: So, you know, it just takes a lot more probing, probing, probing and coming back to being
[Guest]: a, you know, this is an example where I think the peer review process has been fantastic
[Guest]: because it has improved the paper so much, because we have been pushed and pushed and
[Guest]: pushed and pushed and pushed. But we've had to also work our backsides off to do it.
[Amit Varma]: Amazing. Let me ask you a question. Let's see how good an economist you are. Can you
[Amit Varma]: answer this? And the question is, although the IPL and NREGA are completely different
[Amit Varma]: things, what is the one thing they have in common?
[Unknown]: Nahi pata.
[Amit Varma]: Nahi pata. Main pata toh. Yeh kaise economist ho yaar? You know, I tell my friends, somebody
[Amit Varma]: asked me the other day, who is this Kartik Muralidharan? And I said, dekhna, one day
[Amit Varma]: he will win the Nobel Prize for Economics, maybe for this paper only. That will be nice.
[Amit Varma]: Not for something you said on my podcast, obviously, and you failed this question. But
[Amit Varma]: the answer is this, that see, the BCCI, like all sporting bodies, is basically a monopsony.
[Amit Varma]: If you're a cricketer, you can't sell your services to anybody else, but the BCCI. So
[Amit Varma]: now, what do you do to break the system? And in this case, the BCCI did it themselves.
[Amit Varma]: It wasn't imposed from elsewhere. They started the IPL, you know, and what did the IPL do?
[Amit Varma]: It raised wages and employment. So there you go. That's what you have in common. You know,
[Amit Varma]: Dr. John Reyes will suddenly turn on his TV and start watching the IPL.
[Guest]: IPL is basically, that's creating a whole new market. But it highlights again, you know,
[Guest]: if I can, you know, take a minute and go into the social protection chapter, right? Like,
[Guest]: I mean, why I think, you know, we need to think about our welfare spending, A, in a
[Guest]: much more nuanced way, and B, in a fundamentally empirical way, right? Which is we think about,
[Guest]: okay, saare welfare programs, like, you know, is either freebies or, you know, again, the
[Guest]: right things, they are freebies, the left things, we don't do enough. Okay. And again,
[Guest]: the basic point is that if you look at something like farm electricity subsidies, right, those
[Guest]: are probably the single worst financial policy we have in the country, right? Because it
[Guest]: is bad, you know, when I look at quality of welfare expenditure, you think about targeting,
[Guest]: you think about delivery, you think about distortions, right? So it's miserable on targeting
[Guest]: because top 5% of farmers get 50% of the benefits, the bottom 50% of landless owners basically
[Guest]: get nothing. So though you call it farmer welfare, it's really like a mean, a slice
[Guest]: of elite farmers. Second is in terms of going back to your episode with Ajay and Akshay
[Guest]: on electricity reform, right? I mean, that the dysfunction of our discoms is partly hidden
[Guest]: behind free electricity, right? Because that allows them to cover the T&D losses and saying
[Guest]: ye toh free hai, recovery nahi ho raha hai. So your discom crisis is kind of partly coming
[Guest]: from there. And then you have your ecological crisis of the downstream, the water crisis
[Guest]: that's happening because of the suboptimal kind of cultivation, right? So kind of, and
[Guest]: then going back to trust. So in a way, this was not about farm laws per se, because farm
[Guest]: laws wasn't really taking on this issue of subsidy reform, which is way more complicated,
[Guest]: right? But I think why a program like PM Kisan is important is that once you can build the
[Guest]: trust with farmers that the state, in fact, can deliver money to you, right? I mean, and
[Guest]: does this a few times, then it gives you at least some political space of crafting a reform
[Guest]: idea, which again, I have in the expenditure chapter of kind of saying, can I take the
[Guest]: fiscally same amount of subsidy and kind of give it to you as a DBT, like, you know, but
[Guest]: then with metering and billing of the electricity. So it's not about saving money, but it's at
[Guest]: least about reducing the distortions, right? So that's the kind of reform that we need
[Guest]: as a country. It requires both kind of conceptual architecture, it requires communication, it
[Guest]: requires trust, but you know, hopefully we'll build enough of a public consensus around
[Guest]: something like that that needs to happen. Conversely, something like NREGA has been
[Guest]: something that improves both equity and efficiency, right? So you have welfare spending that's
[Guest]: bad for equity and efficiency, welfare spending that's good for both. And there are others
[Guest]: that are good for equity, bad for efficiency, vice versa, that reasonable people can disagree.
[Guest]: And at least as a country, if we can agree on moving from this bottom left quadrant where
[Guest]: things are bad for equity and efficiency, to things that are good on equity and efficiency,
[Guest]: that's again, one of the ways in which you move the arc towards delivering more value
[Guest]: for money.
[Amit Varma]: Fabulous. And I completely agree with you about free electricity for farmers being a
[Amit Varma]: bad thing. And one of the illustrations of that, and it's a classic scene in the unseen,
[Amit Varma]: is that, you know, in Punjab, the farmers were incentivized to grow rice because of
[Amit Varma]: an MSP for rice, right? Which they otherwise would not have because of market dynamics.
[Amit Varma]: But it's an arid land, rice needs a lot of water. What do they do? They use bore wells
[Amit Varma]: to get the water out of the ground. And how do they run these bore wells? Because electricity
[Amit Varma]: is free. So, you know, you have MSPs and free electricity distorting the whole marketplace,
[Amit Varma]: you have a lot of rice. What happens when they produce a lot of rice? They've got rice
[Amit Varma]: stubble at the end of the season to get rid of. How do they get rid of it? The easiest
[Amit Varma]: way for them is to burn it. What happens when they burn it? The fumes go to Delhi and exacerbates
[Amit Varma]: the Delhi fog. So the worst of the Delhi fog happens when farmers in Punjab are burning
[Amit Varma]: rice. And, you know, again, seen in the unseen, all of these sort of connections floating
[Amit Varma]: around. But, you know, something like that is an almost impossible problem of the political
[Amit Varma]: economy to solve because a Punjab politician can't piss the farmers off. So what do you
[Amit Varma]: do? It's just so incredibly complicated. But a couple of sort of final questions and one
[Amit Varma]: is, you know, and both are actually in the personal realm, but one is the good news for
[Amit Varma]: all my listeners that Mr. Karthik Muralidharan is shifting to India, you know, putting skin
[Amit Varma]: in the game as it were. So tell me a little bit about, you know, this already people are
[Amit Varma]: jumping I can hear listeners in advance. So tell me a little bit about, you know, what
[Amit Varma]: prompted you to come back to India? What will you be doing?
[Guest]: No, and I think, again, I feel like your show is, you know, I mean, there is a certain amount
[Guest]: of commitments I'm making, and then hopefully following through on them, like, you know,
[Guest]: once I think like, you know, I said this in 2020, right? I mean, that I, you know, that
[Guest]: I feel that I'm at this inflection point where so far, my life has been nine months, US three
[Guest]: months India. And it's not like I'm moving back fully, but I'm just flipping that around
[Guest]: to nine months, India, three months, US. Okay, so, so basically, I have over a year of accumulated
[Guest]: sabbatical, I have grants that buy out some of my teaching. And so and I think, you know,
[Guest]: at a function, so basically, it'll mean that we're moving to Chennai, we're getting there
[Guest]: September 1, the big and the big marker of moving is that the kids will be in school
[Guest]: in India, right? I mean, in Chennai. So that's really the big marker. It's not like I'm just
[Guest]: coming on sabbatical, like, you know, they'll be there. And I will, you know, be back for
[Guest]: 10 weeks a year and do my teaching in the US. So you know, so that way, I'm still a
[Guest]: UCSD professor, that's kind of my main job. But the big thing I'll be doing in India,
[Guest]: in addition to kind of, you know, not just hopefully finishing the book and getting it
[Guest]: out, but doing a lot more dissemination work of getting the ideas out in a much more, you
[Guest]: know, accessible way, right? I mean, spending time in Indian universities, giving talks,
[Guest]: doing stuff like that. But also, it's really building out CEGIS, right? Because CEGIS is
[Guest]: now, you know, like, that's the skin in the game. That's the walk the talk kind of piece
[Guest]: of this whole enterprise, right? I mean, which is, it's one thing to have a bunch of ideas,
[Guest]: but you really and, and I don't have money, what I have is time, right? So the way I put
[Guest]: skin in the game is committing my time to things that I think are truly important. And,
[Guest]: you know, this, I can say a little bit more about CEGIS now, right, which is the Centre
[Guest]: for Effective Governance of Indian States. You know, we're a nonprofit that works with
[Guest]: state governments, usually in partnership in the finance departments, right, mean to
[Guest]: just try and slowly, right, very, very gently, start implementing some of these principles
[Guest]: in areas of kind of low hanging fruit. And the key USPs, you know, because there's both
[Guest]: intellectual and conceptual clarity, and therefore a certain credibility with the government
[Guest]: and being a nonprofit allows us to, you know, I think, unlike a consultant, I mean, consulting
[Guest]: firms are constantly dependent on government contracts. So you have two problems there,
[Guest]: right? Beyond the confidence and confidence intervals quip I made, like, you know, it's
[Guest]: that. So one is, because you are a paid vendor, right? I mean, you only execute what you're
[Guest]: told in a very tactical way, right? But you don't kind of actually take on a broader thing
[Guest]: of what should be done. And the second problem is, again, yeah, because the, the consultants
[Guest]: in some case, in some ways, are not interested in state capacity, right? They want state
[Guest]: dependency, because that's what creates the contracts, right? That's kind of what you're
[Guest]: interested in. And because, you know, we're coming in as a nonprofit with a deep commitment
[Guest]: to improving state capacity. So for example, in Telangana, which is where we started work,
[Guest]: and mainly because a lot of this just requires trust, right? I mean, and so the current principal
[Guest]: secretary of finance, you know, was commissioned in school education in 2004, when I first
[Guest]: started working in the state, right? So they know that there's a long term commitment when
[Guest]: I'm there, right? And so but one of the things we've done there is that the government has
[Guest]: seconded a bunch of its own staff to this unit, so that they are getting trained in
[Guest]: the data analysis in the ways we're doing things. And so, yeah, so that's kind of building
[Guest]: up in a big way, we added, we've added one state a year, right? It was Telangana, then
[Guest]: Delhi, then Tamil Nadu, Assam, and there's demand now from three or four other states.
[Guest]: So I think the biggest thing I'm going to be doing is really, you know, this Vijayan
[Guest]: team are building the org, but I will function more in the realm of ideas of saying, you
[Guest]: know, here is what we need to do, how do we build kind of the broader understanding of
[Guest]: what needs to happen. So that's the hope, you know, so and then at a personal level,
[Guest]: like I said, normally, I come to India every three months in the pandemic, I've come only
[Guest]: twice in two and a half years. So I just want to go back to the field, I just want to reconnect,
[Guest]: I want to be in the field, going back to schools, going back to clinics, going back to panchayat
[Guest]: secretaries and just, you know, just really, really reconnecting. And that's what I'm hoping
[Amit Varma]: to do.
[Amit Varma]: Fantastic. More power to you. And, and one suggestion regarding sort of the writing you
[Amit Varma]: do moving forward is that why don't you start a newsletter, you know, where you write every
[Amit Varma]: week and I'm serious, it doesn't have to be about ideas or research or study, just start
[Amit Varma]: something personal where you talk about how your week was, something interesting you read,
[Amit Varma]: something interesting you did. And, and since I'm saying this, sort of on a forum where
[Amit Varma]: others can hear this advice that I'm giving to you, I actually give this advice to everyone,
[Amit Varma]: I think, for most people, it's a good idea, because it's a good way to always be thinking
[Amit Varma]: about stuff, getting their mind working, moving the writing muscle, you don't, of course need
[Amit Varma]: those things, because you do think about stuff enough and write enough. But, you know, just
[Amit Varma]: as a way of writing, sort of a way of thinking aloud, like one of the fascinating things
[Amit Varma]: that I find about Twitter is that if you curate your feed properly, you get access to some
[Amit Varma]: of the brightest minds in the world thinking aloud for your benefit, what a privilege that
[Amit Varma]: is. And if someone like you writes a newsletter as well, you know, other people get that insight,
[Amit Varma]: they get to know the person, they become more receptive to the ideas, therefore, you're
[Amit Varma]: going on a journey, you're taking them with you, you know, maybe they would have been
[Amit Varma]: with you on your 14 year journey of writing these papers. So a serious suggestion I'd
[Amit Varma]: give which you can think about. And meanwhile, you know, the, you know, the mandatory sort
[Amit Varma]: of last question, would you like to recommend, you know, books, films, music, which you haven't
[Amit Varma]: recommended before, because I've completely forgotten if I asked you this in previous
[Amit Varma]: episodes, and you recommended stuff. But whatever is top of the mind these days, what are you
[Amit Varma]: enjoying? You know, what gives you joy?
[Guest]: Yeah, you know, and again, I think what I said last time was that I'm listening to podcasts
[Guest]: much more than reading books. And so I, you know, there's, there's a whole new list of
[Guest]: your favorite episodes, you know, I think, which I just really enjoyed so much, I think.
[Guest]: And particularly, I think you've been doing a great job of, you know, of just having more
[Guest]: women on the show. And I've just loved, you know, whether it's Shrayana, whether it's
[Guest]: Neelanjana, whether it's Nirupam Rao, who I know, Urvashi, you know, so all of these
[Guest]: have been great episodes. I've loved, I think the Sneaky Artist one, the one with Mrinal
[Guest]: Pandey was great. I've just loved so many of these episodes, right? Because I just walk
[Guest]: and listen. And it's been fun, because like I said, I connect the dots. I'm sometimes
[Guest]: learning new things. There's just so much from new perspectives. For example, you know,
[Guest]: I think the the more artistic people, right, who you talk to, who I think clearly, at one
[Guest]: level are very suspicious of, you know, markets and efficiency and commoditization and scale,
[Guest]: you know, I think the episode with Anupurna was great, right? Like, you know, about just
[Guest]: the making those Japanese, right? Because it's all, it is not about scale, it is not
[Guest]: about cost effectiveness, it is not about, it is about kind of, you know, that intrinsic
[Guest]: beauty and the slowness is part of what it's about, right? I mean, so I think it's just
[Guest]: coming from kind of a productivity paradigm, right? I mean, the way I do, I think kind
[Guest]: of just hearing those has just been, you know, it's not like I don't have that part of me
[Guest]: with my love of music and all of that stuff. But it's just very nice to just hear those
[Guest]: pieces, right? So yeah, I think in terms of books, you know, more recently, I think in
[Guest]: the context of federalism, in fact, I mean, the one thing again, which I thought you would
[Guest]: ask, which I did want to cover a little bit, right? I mean, is as we think about India
[Guest]: at 75, you know, you, you ask the hope and despair type question, you know, the things
[Guest]: about, so there are some things I am, you know, there's one thing I'm very concerned
[Guest]: about, which I do want to talk about. But in thinking about federalism, I actually there's
[Guest]: this little volume by Madhav Khosla that he puts together, like, you know, letters to
[Guest]: chief ministers, where it was just mind blowing to me that Jawaharlal Nehru used to write
[Guest]: letters every 15 days to every chief minister, okay, and he did this for pretty much 14-15
[Guest]: years. And like Madhav says, you know, I think the value of those letters is that when you
[Guest]: read Nehru's books, they're all pre-independent. So they're really more as political activists,
[Guest]: as opposed to kind of taking, so like they say, right, you campaign in poetry and govern
[Guest]: in prose, right? I mean, so kind of taking the grand lofty ideas of the, you know, of
[Guest]: the idealist into the practical realities of running the government and seeing that
[Guest]: discourse with the chief ministers. I mean, I just think it was, yeah, it's just wonderful
[Guest]: in terms of what it shows about thoughtfulness, about inclusiveness, going back to what you
[Guest]: were saying about, you know, writing every week. I mean, I never thought about that.
[Guest]: But you know, I say I don't have the time, but here was a prime minister making time
[Guest]: to do that kind of writing, I mean, every 15 days, and it suggests that how important
[Guest]: it was, partly as an act of self-reflection, partly as an act of communication. And I think
[Guest]: the reason I want to call attention to that is going back to something else you said about
[Guest]: kind of how our public space for dialogues and difficult conversations seems to have
[Guest]: kind of shrunk, right? I mean, where people are talking past each other, you know, there's
[Guest]: posturing, there's extremities, and how do you kind of find the middle? So I found that
[Guest]: quite nice. There's this other recent book, which I don't know if it's out yet, but I
[Guest]: got a pre-copy from my friend Rahul Sagar, who's got, you know, two books. One is on
[Guest]: Indian foreign policy and intellectual thought in the 19th century. The other one is called
[Guest]: The Progressive Maharaja, which I think, so it's an incredible piece of historical detective
[Guest]: work. And it's based on, you know, Sir Madhava Rao, who was the Diwan of Travancore, and
[Guest]: then the Diwan of Baroda. And it's a set of lessons in governance and statecraft, right,
[Guest]: and that he had put together for the young prince. And so what is great about it is it's
[Guest]: kind of, you know, it's both deeply Indian, but also Western, and it reflects kind of,
[Guest]: you know, what I hope an India will be, which is both kind of confident in what we are,
[Guest]: but open to the best from around the world, right? I mean, and so I think that book is,
[Guest]: yeah, I mean, and also, it kind of resonated with what I'm trying to do right now, which
[Guest]: is really, I guess, write a modern book on statecraft in some ways, but more internally
[Guest]: facing as opposed to aspects of externally facing. So yeah, I mean, these are a couple
[Guest]: of recent books, which I've liked a lot.
[Amit Varma]: Wow, thanks a lot. And so I'll ask the hope this were a question since you prepared for
[Amit Varma]: it, or have you already given the answer?
[Guest]: No, no, it was not even prepared, you know, I mean, I think basically, I think, see, as
[Guest]: we take stock about India 75, I mean, I think the thing, you know, the thing I do want to
[Guest]: reflect on, and you've said a couple of times, it's not even about preparing, it was more
[Guest]: connecting thoughts based on things you've said, about, you know, what keeps the country
[Guest]: together, right? I mean, what keeps the country together? And are there things that we are
[Guest]: taking for granted? Are there fault lines that we need to be careful about that we need
[Guest]: to kind of do purposeful, deliberative thinking about these fault lines without assuming them
[Guest]: away? Okay, so because these are very complex issues that are coming down the turnpike,
[Guest]: okay. So I think the larger question about what keeps India together, I think, you know,
[Guest]: does justice to that. And there are themes of that in many of your episodes, right, including
[Guest]: Chinmayon migration, right? I mean, just that sheer amount of internal migration connection,
[Guest]: you know, keeps everything together, which is wonderful. I think there's something else,
[Guest]: which I don't know if it's been in an episode, but which I think is worth, and this is interesting,
[Guest]: right? Because Ram, the book is masterful, that last chapter on kind of why India survives
[Guest]: is masterful. But you know, it actually does have a bit of a blind spot, which I think
[Guest]: speaks to some of the broader fault lines we face as a country right now, which is, it completely
[Guest]: ignores the, you know, so he does talk about religion, but says religion is not what unifies
[Guest]: the country, because we're not a religious state, which is true. But there is also a
[Guest]: level where there is a cultural component of travel and pilgrimage, say, right? Like,
[Guest]: you know, I mean, that people just travel around the country. And one of the book references,
[Guest]: in fact, which many of you readers may not have seen, is this wonderful book by Diana
[Guest]: Eck, who's a professor of religion, Indian religion at Harvard, right, like, you know,
[Guest]: called India's Sacred Geography. And she's got this lovely phrase there about saying
[Guest]: that this is not a country unified by the power of kings and princes, but by the footsteps
[Guest]: of its pilgrims, right? And, you know, so and growing up in Ahmedabad, I know how, for
[Guest]: example, my South Indian relatives would come and go to Dwarka and go to Somnath, and that
[Guest]: was an important part of coming to Gujarat, you know, whether it's going to Kashi, whether
[Guest]: it's going to Rameshwaram. So I think, you know, that's there. And so, but the reason
[Guest]: I'm saying all of this is that we have going back to federalism and going back to the optimal
[Guest]: size of countries and going back to what keeps India together. I think that there are many,
[Guest]: many, many layers, right? So there is a modern, there are traditional reasons for why we are
[Guest]: together, including, say, things like pilgrimage, the reasons like migration, reasons like the
[Guest]: modern institutions, whether it's the civil service. So all of these things have kind
[Guest]: of played their own role in stitching together, right? The miracle that is India, okay? But
[Guest]: we can't take it for granted. We can't take it for granted. And, you know, for example,
[Guest]: there used to be this thing called National Integration Council, okay? And part of their
[Guest]: job was precisely to constantly think about, you know, identifying and preempting fault
[Guest]: lines, right? I mean, through kind of proactive action. So I think, as I think about India,
[Guest]: what worries me the most is kind of the parliamentary delimitation, okay? Like, I mean, that may
[Guest]: be coming up, right? And so that's the can we've kicked down for 50 years, right? With
[Guest]: 71, there was a constitutional amendment, and we've frozen the representation at that
[Guest]: 71 population. But if we were to redo this now, okay, based on population, then effectively,
[Guest]: you are completely reshaping the political map of the country, right? In terms of the
[Guest]: population ratios, if you were to keep Kerala as a constant, right? I mean, would have more
[Guest]: than doubled in UP and Bihar, right? Relative to, and not just the South, but parts of the
[Guest]: West as well, right? So as we think about the grand federal compromise that's India,
[Guest]: and you can see why this is such a core tension, right? Because there are democratic reasons
[Guest]: to say that we need to not veer too far away from one person, one vote, okay? So which
[Guest]: would say that any delimitation is the right thing to do. But that also goes deeply contra,
[Guest]: right? Like, I mean, to kind of this federal spirit, and you can see, and because the South
[Guest]: would then, not just South, but the South and the West, right? I mean, is worse off
[Guest]: both economically and politically, right? Like, and so how do we navigate this is going
[Guest]: to require an enormous amount of political and, you know, and imagination to say, here
[Guest]: are these principles that are in tension with each other. And how do we architect something
[Guest]: that allows everybody to be better off, right? And but that requires, you know, genuine dialogue,
[Guest]: it requires creating the space for dialogue. And I don't think it's something that, you
[Guest]: know, this particular government is incapable of, right? I think Arun Jaitley is, you know,
[Guest]: he shepherded GST through partly through kind of a consultative temperament that listened
[Guest]: to everybody, right? Like, I mean, and brought things together. And I do think that this
[Guest]: is something that we should prepare for, right? I mean, and have either, you know, some body
[Guest]: of experts, constitutional body, political representation to kind of, you know, so that
[Guest]: it doesn't hit us out of nowhere. And then because once again, positions get entrenched,
[Guest]: it'll be very, very difficult, right? Because, you know, if you have people saying, no, one
[Guest]: person, one vote, we have to do this, or others say, no, we had actually talked about population
[Guest]: control education as a national goal. And there are states that have met this and states
[Guest]: that have not. And if you were to follow delimitation, you would completely change the federal contract.
[Guest]: So that I think is very, very, it's one of the most difficult problems I see coming down
[Guest]: the turnpike. And, you know, you can't just push it away, right? And so it's going to
[Guest]: require both political and institutional imagination, right? So there are ways to kind of navigate
[Guest]: this. You know, one, you might say, listen, we froze things in 2001, and things have turned
[Guest]: out fine, like, you know, so we can keep that and, you know, things have served us fine.
[Guest]: The other is to say, we are deviating more and more from the principle of one person,
[Guest]: one vote. And so you need some modifications. And so then you could have, you could think
[Guest]: about saying that maybe, right, you know, you think about the two houses of parliament,
[Guest]: right? I mean, going back to the original purpose of Rajya Sabha as something represented.
[Guest]: So you're saying, there are maybe the Lok Sabha becomes population proportional, and
[Guest]: then, but the Rajya Sabha goes to kind of a fixed number per state, or, you know, some
[Guest]: hybrid so that there is a certain amount of voice that is kind of there for the less popular
[Guest]: states. Or you could have formulae that look like saying, we will freeze political representation
[Guest]: the way it is, but on the fiscal side, allow the Finance Commission to start accounting
[Guest]: for newer populations, right? So anyway, so I'm just putting this out there and saying
[Guest]: that, you know, India at 75 is an incredible achievement that, you know, we're all proud
[Guest]: of, that we're all a part of. But I think, I do worry, and this goes back to some of
[Guest]: your older, you know, earlier questions about that, are we shrinking the public space for
[Guest]: the difficult conversations about, you know, where we are able to listen, and really come
[Guest]: up with win-win solutions or solutions that are effectively compromises that represent
[Guest]: kind of the validity of different people's positions, and how do you come up with something
[Guest]: like that, right? And so, yeah, so not to be pessimistic, but I'm just saying that we
[Guest]: cannot take these things for granted. And it does require constant purposeful engagement
[Guest]: by the citizens and leaders of the country to kind of make sure that we continue to stay
[Guest]: on track and get to full potential.
[Amit Varma]: I couldn't agree with you more that we can't take it for granted. And I think sometimes
[Amit Varma]: the mistake that we make is when we think of India as lines on a map, that these are
[Amit Varma]: the lines on a map, and, you know, this is what we are. And to me, it's a little bit
[Amit Varma]: more than that. And it's possibly too nebulous to articulate precisely what my idea of India,
[Amit Varma]: pompous words, might be. But more and more, I think we can't take it for granted, because
[Amit Varma]: it is under threat. You know, when I see some of the fault lines in our society exploding
[Amit Varma]: today, like the anti-Muslim politics of today, for example, it makes me really worried about
[Amit Varma]: where it could go. And, you know, if the worst case scenarios were to come about, however
[Amit Varma]: low probability there might be, what is the way out of that? I worry about that as well.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you know, and even this whole sense of okay, we've reached 75 years as this geographic
[Amit Varma]: entity and more or less these lines on a map, minor modifications here and there. And China
[Amit Varma]: has nibbled away a bit of it recently. But this is kind of what we've got. But I think
[Amit Varma]: it's only been 75 years. That's not very long. Things don't last too long. You know, I think
[Amit Varma]: what one of the biases we have is we think the present moment is permanent, that everything
[Amit Varma]: will be as it is today. And that is not really the case. I mean, one way in which it could
[Amit Varma]: change, which is a positive way is that, you know, technology has this push towards globalization
[Amit Varma]: where we can all be global citizens. And it doesn't really, you know, nation states become
[Amit Varma]: more and more irrelevant, they don't die, or they don't vanish or something, they just
[Amit Varma]: become more irrelevant, because individuals become empowered to join whatever collective
[Amit Varma]: they feel like in whatever way, even if they pay taxes in a particular geography. But another,
[Amit Varma]: you know, when I think about delimitation, for example, I wonder if that can be, you
[Amit Varma]: know, if not handled properly, can that be something that, you know, provides a trigger
[Amit Varma]: for the lines on the map changing and not looking the same. And I don't even know if
[Amit Varma]: that would be a good thing or a bad thing. Like one musing that I think I brought it
[Amit Varma]: up in my episode with Niranjana, which you mentioned you've heard, is that what if at
[Amit Varma]: independence we weren't one large country like we are, but a whole bunch of small countries,
[Amit Varma]: you know, federalism by force, as it were, would it be better? And would it be would
[Amit Varma]: it be worse? And I can make arguments for either, really. So who knows where things
[Amit Varma]: are going? I mean, I once you know, when I was a poker player wrote a column called unlikely
[Amit Varma]: is inevitable, about the law of truly large numbers, which basically states that no matter
[Amit Varma]: how unlikely something is given a large enough sample size is bound to happen. And I think
[Amit Varma]: given the sample size of time itself, you know, given the sample size of space, we had
[Amit Varma]: one tiny planet in, you know, such a large universe, you know, millions of years have
[Amit Varma]: passed, and we've just, you know, gotten through 75 of those, you know, you cannot take anything
[Amit Varma]: for granted, and you have to fight for what you believe in, and which is, which is in
[Guest]: fact what you do. But I want to be more optimistic. And again, going back to one of your episodes,
[Guest]: I think it was Annapurna, right? I think in the end, there was this thing about knowledge
[Guest]: and love. And she talked about, you know, loving every part of this country, right?
[Guest]: I mean, having traveled, you know, having traveled around, right? And so, I do think
[Guest]: that even though these are lines on a map, that there is something truly special about
[Guest]: the modern Indian state. And then coming back to refrain that you've had in many episodes,
[Guest]: right? Which is, was this a liberal constitution, illiberal society? Again, so I think Rahul
[Guest]: Verma had the best answer to that, right? I mean, which is that, whatever it is, it
[Guest]: is the only version that could have worked, where essentially the core idea of the Indian
[Guest]: constitution is a constitution that accommodates diversity, right? I mean, and that's why India
[Guest]: is important, both intrinsically for itself and for the world, right? I mean, it is that
[Guest]: in a world that, you know, is constantly driven by different kinds of conflict. So, you know,
[Guest]: even the current government, like, you know, wants India to be, quote, unquote, vishwaguru.
[Guest]: But that vishwaguruness comes not from proclaim it, but comes from your actions, right? I
[Guest]: mean, and the actions of kind of building a modern polity, right, that can accommodate
[Guest]: this kind of diversity in an inclusive, pluralistic way, while kind of building the foundations
[Guest]: of economic growth and prosperity, and also kind of, you know, building an agenda of empowerment
[Guest]: of the most marginalized, which again, we've never succeeded as close to our aspirations,
[Guest]: but those aspirations are there, right? So, I think, you know, and I end my book partly
[Guest]: with kind of saying, strengthening India, leading the world, right? Like, I mean, which
[Guest]: is, in the end, the idea of India needs to be something that is sustained by its attractiveness,
[Guest]: as opposed to by its force, right? So, and coming back to another episode where Pramit,
[Guest]: I think, talked about when he was a student in Assam, that he would face these kind of,
[Guest]: you know, there would be the separatist kind of sympathies, right, among the youth, among
[Guest]: students, whatever, and now as he grew older, he's like, listen, I would still much, much,
[Guest]: much rather be in India than China, which is the counterfactual, right? Like, I mean,
[Guest]: and so, essentially, the power of the idea of India is just the, this unique experiment
[Guest]: in human history that has accommodated this kind of diversity, right? I mean, and created
[Guest]: that space for flourishing every kind of diversity. So, and that's why I think it's important
[Guest]: that we survive and we flourish and we do all these things, not just for us, but also
[Guest]: for the world. But I think as we go back and read some of these early documents of the
[Guest]: founders of these letters, you know, and I think Rahul, again, is an old friend, right?
[Guest]: I mean, part of his rediscovery, for example, of Indian public life was that of all these
[Guest]: periodicals and the incredibly active intellectual life of pre-independence India, where people
[Guest]: were writing and writing and periodicals and rebutting and going back and forth, you know,
[Guest]: that we, and that's why I think, again, not to flatter you, right? Like, you know, but
[Guest]: what makes, I think, the podcast then an important space is that we simply do not have the space
[Guest]: in our public discourse, right? For these long, deep conversations that are, you know,
[Guest]: measured respectful engagement. Now, of course, they're all bilateral, but eventually, like,
[Guest]: you know, maybe there are fora and things that we can create that can do these things.
[Guest]: So thank you for doing your bit. And we shall stay optimistic about, you know, where this
[Guest]: great country goes next 25 years.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and I should point out to the Rahul Sagar book you're referring to, I think it's
[Amit Varma]: called Two Rays of Fallen People, the publisher just sent it to me. So I must read it and
[Amit Varma]: invite him on the show as well. And, you know, I mean, I love this country as much as you
[Amit Varma]: do. That's why I, that's why we must fight for it. But I don't want to be Vishwa Guru.
[Amit Varma]: I want to be Vishwa Bandhu. I think, you know, male ego is the end of everything. So, Karthik,
[Amit Varma]: Karthik boss, thank you so much for this, you know, and I'm so flattered and almost
[Amit Varma]: like awed by, you know, you're using my episodes as footnotes in your conversation with me.
[Amit Varma]: It's quite mind blowing. I'm, you know, I'm going to dream about this. So thanks for coming
[Amit Varma]: on the show. And hopefully we can actually meet in person soon, which we haven't yet
[Amit Varma]: and, you know, have an even longer conversation.
[Guest]: Thanks, Amit. Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, check out the show notes, enter rabbit holes
[Amit Varma]: at will. You can follow Karthik on Twitter at Karthik underscore econ. You can follow
[Amit Varma]: me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-E-A-R-M-A. You can browse past episodes of The Scene and
[Amit Varma]: the Unseen at sceneunseen.in. Thank you for listening.